Title: A Correspondence-Driven Framework for Un-paired Spatial Multi-Omics Integrative Analysis

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 49

Markdown Content:
A Correspondence -Driven  Framework for Un -paired Spatial Multi -

Omics Integrative Analysis 

Wenhao Cai 1,2 ,3 , Weizhong Li 1,2,*  

> 1

School of Medicine,  Shenzhen Campus of  Sun Yat -sen University, Sun Yat -sen University, 

Guangming District, Shenzhen, Guangdong 518107, China  

> 2

Zhongshan School of Medicine, Sun Yat -sen University, Guangzhou,  Guangdong 510080 

China  

> 3

Department of Computer Science , University  of Manchester , Manchester , United Kingdom 

* Corresponding author: Weizhong Li ( liweizhong@mail.sysu.edu.cn )

ORCID: Weizhong Li (0000 -0002 -9003 -7733) 

Abstract 

Recent advances in spatial multi -omics technologies provide unprecedented 

opportunities to interpret molecular features in tissue micro -environments  but  remain 

challenging  in  integrative analysis across heterogeneous datasets.  Here we present 

SpatialFuser, a correspondence -driven  deep learning framework  for integrative analysis 

across un -paired spatial epigenomics, transcriptomics,  proteomics, and metabolomics. 

SpatialFuser introduces a Multi -head Collaborative Graph Attention auToEncoder 

(MCGATE) to infer multi -scale cellular correspondences for fine -grained 

characterization of spatial heterogeneity beyond predefined spatial  neighbo urhoods.  By 

incorporati ng flexible geometric pre -matching for coarse initialization and inferring 

adaptive cross -slice correspondences via iteratively refined optimal transport, 

SpatialFuser enables robust integration across heterogeneous datasets with varying 

geometries, spatia l resolutions, developmental stages, and molecular modalities. 

Benchmarking demonstrates superior performance and reliability against existing  state -

of -the -art methods in spatial domain identification, cross -slice alignment,  and multi -

omics integration. Ap plications to real datasets demonstrate that  SpatialFuser resolves 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

precise molecular patterns, reveals developmental  dynamics, and recovery of 

complementary signals across modalities. Cross -resolution integration of weakly 

correlated modalities by our method further  uncovers previously obscured biological 

variation.  Our framework is generalizable and versatile, enabling customized analytical 

scenarios and potential extension for emerging omics. 

Keywords:  SpatialFuser , spatial multi -omics , cross -modality  integrati on,  graph neural 

networks , contrastive learning 

Highlights: 

• A unified deep learning framework for spatial multi -omics  integrative data analysis 

• Superior performance against state -of -the -art methods  in  spatial identification ，

alignment , and  multi -omics  integration 

• Unprecedented  cross -modality analysis  scenarios to offer a holistic view of spatial 

multi -omics 

• Comprehensive framework design  with  generalizability and versatility  for 

customized scenarios  and  potential extension 

Introduction 

Spatial technologies  enable  researchers to measure  expression levels  and  reveal cellular 

heterogeneity across multiple molecular layers  such as  transcriptomics, epigenomics, 

proteomics , and metabolomics  at specific spatial locations, and have been widely 

applied in studies of tissue organization and molecular dynamics [1]. These 

technologies can be roughly categorized into imaging -based  approaches  includ ing 

osmFISH [2], MERFISH [3], CODEX [4], MIBI [5], CosMx SMI [6], and MALDI -

MSI [7], and sequencing -based  techniques  such as  10 X Visium [8], BaristaSeq [9],

Stereo -seq [10 ], MAGIC -seq [11 ], Stereo -CITE -seq [12 ], Spatial ATAC -seq [13 ], and 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Spatial ATAC –RNA -seq [14 ]. Recent advances also  cover  AI -powered techniques such 

as PLATO [15 ], which leverage computational approaches to overcome current 

limitations in biotechnology , such as low sequencing depth . With  different data 

modalities convey ing  unique biological insight s from divers  e complementary 

perspective s, we now have an  unprecedented  opportunity to achieve a comprehensive 

spatial landscape of cellular profile, thereby enhancing our understanding of key 

processes such as cell function [16 ], tissue development [17 ], and disease 

progression [18 ].

Computational methods have been developed to decipher intra -slice heterogeneity 

from typically spatial transcriptomics data  with  high -dimension and high -spars ity 

through spatial domain detection.  SpaGCN [19 ] employs a graph convolutional network 

to integrate spatial gene expression with coordinate information for spatial domain 

identification. STAGATE [20 ] adopts a spatially -aware graph attention autoencoder to 

capture spatial structures, while SEDR [21 ] uses a deep variational autoencoder to 

jointly learn gene expression and spatial relationships.  These unimodal methods model 

spatial relationships through predefined  neighbo urhoods , implicitly assuming that 

spatial proximity reflects biological similarity, an assumption that often breaks down 

in contexts such as tumo ur microenvironments, immune infiltration, and developmental 

migration.  Meanwhile, the growing expansion of spatial technologies into multi -omics 

indicates that increasing numbers of tissue slices will be profiled from proteomic, 

epigenomic, and other molecular perspectives , u nderlying this is  an  urgent need for 

unified computational tools capable of decoding spatial data  from diverse omics 

modalities. 

To achieve a  deeper  understanding of complex biological systems, integrative 

analysis of  cross -modality  spatial data has become increasingly important. However, 

heterogeneous datasets often suffer from batch effects or modality biases, resulting in 

discrepancies in feature structures,  expression  distributions, and biological semantics, 

posing challenges  for  effective data integration and slice alignment. Existing 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

computational tools attempt to address th ese  issue s but remain  limited , particularly  for 

heterogeneous multi -omics scenarios. For example, SIMO [22 ] employs probabilistic 

alignment to map single -cell multi -omics data onto homologous spatial transcriptomics 

slices for detecting spatial cellular topological patterns, but it requires paired datasets 

and is restricted to within -slice analysis.  STAligner [23 ] employs a graph attention 

autoencoder and triplet adversarial learning to align spatial transcriptomic slices, but it 

does not extend to multi -omics integration. SLAT [24 ] uses graph convolutional 

networks and adversarial learning to reconstruct 3D tissues while correcting batch 

effects across slices, yet it fails to integrate modalities with weakly correlated features, 

such as transcriptomics and proteomics. 

In the presence of substantial  feature  semantic discrepancies across modalities, 

explicitly modeling feature dependencies becomes challenging.  MISO [25 ] addresses 

this by learning modality -specific embeddings and their interactions to identify 

biologically relevant spatial domains, but it cannot perform cross -slice integration. 

Similarly , SpatialGlue [26 ] and  MultiGATE [27 ] apply dual -attention graph models to 

jointly analy se spatial multi -omics from the same tissue, yet they heavily rely on shared 

spatial coordinate systems or hard -coded biological priors to link weakly correlated 

features. Th ese integrative methods are effective for unimodal or same -slice multi -

omics data but lack generalizability in heterogeneous multi -omics scenarios. 

Methodologically, many integrative tools assume consistent feature structures across 

datasets , requiring dimensionality matching through preprocessing. This can lead to 

information loss when  the intrinsic complexity of raw modalities differs. Some also 

assume similar cell compositions across slices and adopt rigid integration strategies, 

increasing the risk of over -alignment. Therefore, new computational tools are  urgently 

needed for spatially aware cross -omics integration that  can  offer better biological 

interpretability and generalizability  through  more flexible and robust analysis across 

diverse and emerging spatial omics modalities. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Here, we introduce SpatialFuser, a unified correspondence -centric deep learning 

framework for un -paired spatial multi -omics data integrative analysis, enabling 

accurate spatial interpretation, effective cross -slice alignment, and robust cross -

modality inte gration.  Instead of relying on predefined similarity metrics or spatial 

neighbourhood structures, SpatialFuser treats correspondences as guidance for model 

learning.  Specifically , it  employs graph neural networks to learn intra -slice multi -scale 

cell –cell  correspondences  in a latent space, capturing fine -grained spatial heterogeneity, 

and incorporates flexible geometric pre -matching for coarse initialization under 

geometric mismatch.  By iteratively inferring cross -slice correspondences via soft 

optimal transport and coupling them with contrastive representation learning, 

SpatialFuser jointly refines  cross -slice  correspondence estimation and modality fusion, 

enabling robust integration across heterogeneous and cross -resolution datasets. 

We benchmarked SpatialFuser on classical 10 X Visium datasets to evaluate its 

quantitative accuracy and robustness in spatial domain identification , and  then 

validated its cross -platform and cross -modality generalizability on osmFISH and 

CODEX datasets.  In unimodal multi -slice joint analysis, SpatialFuser better  conducted 

adjacent BaristaSeq  slices integration and alignment than state -of -the -art methods 

reported in previous benchmark s[28 ], and effectively captured fine -grained 

developmental dynamics through integrative analysis of multi -developmental -stage 

spatial  Stereo -seq  samples. In spatial multi -omics scenarios, SpatialFuser outperforms 

existing methods in resolving subtle spatial patterns of cellular states and enhances the 

detection of lowly expressed but epigenetically primed marker genes by integrating 

complementary  information from spatial ATAC –RNA -seq data, thereby revealing 

lineage -associated regulatory signals.  In integrative analys is across multi -omics 

samples with weakly  correlated  features, SpatialFuser effectively integrates 

transcriptomic  (MAGIC -seq), proteom ic  (PLATO), and metabolomic  (MALDI -MSI) 

data across varying spatial resolutions to improve the fine -grained characterization of 

spatial topological patterns . Th ese results  highlight the capability of SpatialFuser to 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

infer cell state transitions and transcriptional readiness within spatial tissue 

architectures , and to identify  fine -grained functional regions that are challenging to 

resolve with low -resolution technologies alone. SpatialFuser demonstrate s versatility 

and generalizability in decoding complex biological systems through comprehensive 

spatial multi -omics integration. 

Results 

The o verview architecture  of SpatialFuser 

SpatialFuser takes molecular features and spatial coordinates from spatial omics data 

as input, enabling both fine -grained single -slice analysis and cross -sample integrative 

analysis across modalities including epigenomics, transcriptomics, proteomics, and 

metabolomics  (Fig. 1a) . SpatialFuser is a  unified  framework designed to support 

diverse tasks,  such as  accurate spatial interpretation, robust cross -slice alignment, and 

effective cross -modality integration  (Fig. 1b) . It first  represents the  input as grap h-

structured data by constructing a spatial adjacency network based on spatial coordinates, 

and  employs a  Multi -head  Collaborative  Graph  AT tention au toEncoder (MCGATE) to 

learn modality -specific embeddings through a reconstruction task  (Fig. 1b  Step 2 &  Fig. 

1c) . In the encoder, MCGATE uses the predefined  correspondence  graph to  guide  local 

attention  aggregation , while also constructing a feature similarity graph in the low -

dimensional latent space to capture long -range feature  correspondence s. This similarity 

graph is fed back into the encoder to dynamically refine local attention weights and 

establish long -range attentio n. The collaborative attention mechanism enables the 

integration of multi -scale spatial  context  and semantic information, allowing 

SpatialFuser to more effectively learn spatial molecular patterns. As  a general 

embedding model for spatial omics data, MCGATE is designed to be modular and 

scalable, enabling SpatialFuser to be broadly applicable across diverse modalities and 

experimental platforms. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig . 1. A  unified  deep learning framework for single -sample and cross -slice 

spatial multi -omics analysis. a,  Overview of SpatialFuser. SpatialFuser integrates 

molecular features and spatial coordinates from spatial omics data, supporting both 

fine -grained single -slice profiling and cross -sample analysis across modalities such as 

epigenomics, transcriptomics, pro teomics, and metabolomics.  b,  Schematic 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

representation of the SpatialFuser framework. The analysis workflow includes: 

MCGATE -based embedding learning, coordinate pre -matching for rigid slice 

registration, dual matching and fusion layers for multimodal integration, and whole -

slice spot mapping fo r downst ream integrative analysis.  c,  Network architecture of 

MCGATE. MCGATE represents spatial omics data as a graph by constructing a 

spatial adjacency network from coordinates. It applies multi -head collaborative graph 

attention to learn modality -specif ic embeddings via a reconstruction task, guided by a 

spatial graph for local attention and a dynamically updated feature similarity graph for 

long -range attention. Designed to be modular and scalable, MCGATE can be applied 

across diverse spatial omics moda lities and platforms. 

The initial pre -matching of coordinates across tissue slices  is a n essential step for 

the alignment of spatial omics data [29 ]. To accommodate diverse spatial distributions, 

SpatialFuser models spatial expression data as 2D point clouds and offers two 

geometric registration algorithms: Iterative Closest Point (ICP) and Normal 

Distributions Transform (NDT)  (Fig. 1b  Step 2 ). ICP is well suited for datasets with 

regularly spaced spots and clear structural grids (e.g., 10 X Visium), while NDT 

performs better on datasets with densely packed, irregularly distributed spots and 

indistinct boundaries (e.g., CODEX and Stereo -seq). Th is  flexible pre -matching 

strateg y provide s robust initialization for subsequent fine -grained alignment. 

Alignment and integration are not strictly independent tasks [28 ]. To support cross -

slice analysis, SpatialFuser jointly addresses these two tasks through an iteratively 

trained dual -layer architecture consisting of a matching layer based on the Sinkhorn 

algorithm and a fusion layer grounded in contrastive learning  (Fig. 1b  Step 3 ). In the 

matching layer, the alignment problem is formulated as a graph matching task and 

solved as an optimal transport problem via the Sinkhorn algorithm. To better support 

cross -resolution alignment and prevent over -alignment, a dustbin channel 

mechanis m[30 ] is incorporated  to filter out  unmatched or ambiguous points. In the 

fusion layer, SpatialFuser employs a contrastive learning strategy, where high -

confidence  cell -cell  correspondence s from the matching layer serve as anchor -positive 

pairs to guide the correction of batch effects and modality biases, and randomly 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

sampled anchor -negative pairs from non -neighbo uring regions within the same slice to 

preserve the model’s sensitivity to  true  biological variation. SpatialFuser introduces an 

absolute distance constraint into the triplet loss to enhance model stability and 

convergence [31 ], ensuring accurate and consistent mapping of spatial data into a shared 

embedding space. Finally, SpatialFuser conducts rigorous quality control to achieve 

whole -slice spot mapping  (Fig. 1b  Step 4), providing a reliable reference for 

downstream integrative analyses. 

In  brief , SpatialFuser consists of four key components: MCGATE,  a coordinate 

pre -matching module, a matching layer based on the Sinkhorn algorithm, and a fusion 

layer driven by contrastive learning. Each component  can operate independently or 

seamlessly integrate into a unified workflow, providing a comprehensive and 

streamlined solution for downstream analysis of spatial multi -omics data across diverse 

experimental platforms and resolutions. 

Accurate  spatial  inference across  diverse  experimental  platforms and  modalities 

SpatialFuser proposes a  unified  tool for spatial multi -omics inference, enabling 

accurate detection of spatial distributions of tissue domains or cell types. To evaluate 

the performance of SpatialFuser against existing spatial domain detection algorithms, 

we conducted  a benchmark ing  using the classic 10 X Visium [8] human dorsolateral 

prefrontal cortex (DLPFC) dataset [32 ], which has well -defined morphological 

boundaries and reliable manual annotations  (Fig. 2a  & Supplementary Fig. 1) . The 

original labels were used as ground truth, and five evaluation metrics were employed: 

Adjusted Rand Index (ARI), Adjusted Mutual Information (AMI), Homogeneity, 

Completeness, and V -Measure.  We first compared SpatialFuser with other state -of -the -

art spatial domain detection methods based on the Mclust [33 ] clustering strategy, 

including SpaGCN [19 ], STAGATE [20 ], SEDR [21 ], and STAligner [23 ] (Fig. 2b) . On 

average across the 12 DLPFC slices, SpatialFuser achieved the highest accuracy (mean 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

ARI = 0.625; max = 0.809; min = 0.533), followed by STAligner (mean ARI = 0.556; 

max = 0.675; min = 0.469). Notably, although SpaGCN integrates high -resolution 

histological images during training, its performance was substantially lower than that 

of other  methods relying solely on molecular and spatial information (mean ARI = 

0.422; max = 0.541; min = 0.225 ), suggesting that the utility of histological information 

is highly dependent on the modeling and integration strategy, rather than on its 

inclusion alo ne. To further evaluate SpatialFuser’s advantages in downstream analysis, 

we also benchmarked it using commonly used clustering methods in omics data 

analysis, including Leiden [34 ] (Supplementary Fig. 2a)  and Louvain [35 ]

(Supplementary Fig. 2b) . These results demonstrate that SpatialFuser enables accurate 

spatial domain identification and consistently outperforms existing  state -of -the -ar t tools 

across diverse clustering contexts. 

We conducted an ablation study to evaluate the effectiveness of the collaborative 

attention mechanism. The results demonstrate that the long -range attention significantly 

enhances the  SpatialFuser ’s ability to capture spatial distribution patterns  (Fig. 2b, 

Supplementary Fig. 2a -b) . Using slice -151676 from the DLPFC dataset as an example, 

we randomly selected 10 spatial spots from cortical layers 3 and 6 and tracked their 

long -range  correspondence  sampling during training. The distribution of sampled spots 

closely  aligned  to the tissue region patterns  (Fig. 2c) , further validating the 

effectiveness and biological relevance of long -range information propagation. We also 

tested the robustness of SpatialFuser by comparing clustering accuracy across different 

hyperparameters  (see  Methods) , demonstrati ng that the model is insensitive to network 

structure and random seeds  (Supplementary Fig. 3a -b) .

Spatial omics data generated from different experimental platforms and modalities 

exhibit s significant differences in feature structures, distributions, and biological 

semantics. We further evaluated SpatialFuser’s ability to identify spatial domains 

across multiple platforms and modalities using the osmFISH somatosensory cortex 

dataset [2] and the CODEX [4] human muscle -invasive bladder cancer tumor dataset [36 ].

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

On the image -based osmFISH dataset, SpatialFuser accurately identified spatial 

domains in the somatosensory cortex with an ARI of 0.61  (Fig. 2d) . For the CODEX 

spatial proteomics dataset, we re -label led the three main cell types,  epithelial cells, 

stromal cells, and  immune cells, mentioned in the original paper based on the 

annotations provided by the authors for downstream spatial inference. SpatialFuser 

successfully captured the spatial distribution patterns of all  the  three key cell types ( Fig. 

2e , ARI = 0.45 ) The relatively lower ARI score may be attributed to the higher spatial 

heterogeneity of tumo ur tissues [37 ]. These results demonstrate the robustness and 

versatility of SpatialFuser in cross -platform, multi -omics spatial data analysis. 

To evaluate SpatialFuser’s  utility in downstream analysis, we assessed its low -

dimensional embeddings for trajectory inference and reconstructed feature for spatial 

variable gene (SVG) identification. Partition -based graph abstraction [38 ] (PAGA) was 

employed to infer trajectories on DLPFC slice -151675 using embeddings learned by 

SpatialFuser, SEDR, and STAligner. In the UMAP plot  (Fig. 2f) , SpatialFuser’s 

embedding closely recapitulated the developmental  progression  from white matter to 

layer 6 and sequentially to layer 1. Comparatively, embeddings from SEDR and 

STAligner exhibited less plausible developmental trajectories. We further compared 

the expression patterns of three region -enriched marker genes between the r aw data and 

SpatialFuser -denoised data in DLPFC slice -151675. After reconstructi on, all selected 

genes showed clear differential expression in their enriched regions, while the raw 

spatial expression was noisy and inconsistent  (Fig.  2g) . Collectively, these results 

demonstrate that SpatialFuser can accurately capture feature expression patterns and 

reduce noise, thereby better supporting single -sample analysis and spatial heterogeneity 

studies. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 2. SpatialFuser accurately resolves tissue domains across diverse 

experimental platforms and modalities.  a,  Comparison of spatial domains identified 

by SpaGCN, STAGATE, SEDR, STAligner, and SpatialFuser for DLPFC slice -

151674.  b,  Boxplots of five evaluation metrics (ARI, AMI, Homogeneity, 

Completeness, V -measure) for Mclust clustering results across 12 DLPFC sections.  c, 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Long -range feature propagation paths of ten randomly selected spots from cortical 

layers 3 and 6 during MCGATE training on DLPFC slice -151676.  d,  Spatial domains 

identified by Mclust clustering on low -dimensional embeddings generated by 

SpatialFuser in the osmFISH somatosensory cortex dataset.  e,  Distributions of 

epithelial, stromal, and immune cells identified by Mclust clustering on low -

dimensional embeddings generated by SpatialFuser  for  slice -210308_TMA2_reg6 of 

the CODEX muscle -invasive bladder cancer  dataset.  f,  UMAP visualizations and 

PAGA graphs generated from SEDR, STAligner, and SpatialFuser embeddings for 

DLPFC section -151675 . Red lines highlight incorrect trajectory inferences.  g, 

SpatialFuser enhances spatial patterns of layer -enriched and marker genes in the 

DLPFC dataset. Raw and SpatialFuser -denoised spatial expression patterns are shown 

for MOG, SATB2, and TBR1 in DLPFC section -151675.  ARI, adjusted Rand index; 

AMI, adjusted mutual information; DLPFC, dorsolateral prefrontal cortex; MCGATE, 

multi -head collaborative graph attention autoencoder. 

Spatiotemporal  alignment for  revealing  tissue  heterogeneity and  developmental 

dynamics 

Integrative and comparative analysis of spatial omics datasets is critical for unravel ling 

spatial complexity and temporal change s in tissue systems [39 ]. To assess the 

performance of SpatialFuser in pairwise slice alignment and integration, we first 

applied it to two adjacent slices from the BaristaSeq mouse visual cortex dataset [9],

comprising 1525 and 2042 spots, respectively  (Fig. 3a) . We evaluated spot -to -spot 

alignment accuracy across the entire tissue section  (see Methods) , comparing 

SpatialFuser with three state -of -the -art methods reported in previous benchmarks [28 ],

including  SPACEL [40 ], SLAT [24 ], and STAligner [23 ] (Fig. 3b) . Owing to its use of 

ground -truth labels during training  (see Methods) , SPACEL achieved the highest 

alignment accuracy (0.9 87 , 1519 matches) , followed closely by SpatialFuser (0.972, 

1516 matches) and STAligner (0.949, 1508 matches), while SL AT showed noticeably 

lower performance (0.8 57, 1525 matches ). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

An effective integration method should not only achieve accurate alignment but 

also preserve underlying biological patterns in the latent space. To this end, we further 

evaluated the spatial fidelity of the integrated embeddings. UMAP visualization 

showed  that all four methods effectively removed batch effects  (Fig. 3c) . With original 

annotations used as supervision, SPACEL maintained strong region -level separation 

(Supplementary Fig. 4) , but its embedding space appeared fragmented  (Supplementary 

Fig. 5) , s uggesting limited intra -domain coherence despite minimal cross -domain 

mixing. STAligner and SLAT preserved the hierarchical structure of the six cortical 

layers to some extent, but layer boundaries were blurred and showed considerable 

mixing between adjace nt layers. Compared to  these  methods, SpatialFuser produced 

embeddings with clearer expression patterns showed in UMAP  (Fig. 3c  &

Supplementary Fig. 5)  and more hierarchically organized, anatomically consistent 

domain structures that closely matched the gr ound truth  (Supplementary Fig. 4) .

To quantitatively compare the effectiveness of these methods in supporting 

integrative spatial heterogeneity analysis, we performed clustering on the joint 

embeddings from each pair of BaristaSeq slices using the Mclust algorithm, focusing 

primarily on the  ARI before and after alignment and integration. Since SLAT and 

SPACEL operates only in multi -slice mode, ARI scores before integration were left 

unpopulated. The bar plot  (Fig. 3d)  shows that SpatialFuser demonstrated the best 

performance  for  post -integra tion, and the integration process enabled more accurate 

capture of spatial patterns, as clustering on the integrated embeddings yielded spatial 

domains more consistent with the ground truth (average ARI=0.86). 

We further evaluated SpatialFuser’s efficacy in integrating non -consecutive slices 

from different developmental stages, which exhibit significant differences in cell -type 

composition and distribution. We employed a Stereo -seq [12 ] dataset representing 

axolotl regenerative telencephalon [10 ], which has manual annotations for each tissue 

region as reference, and applied SpatialFuser to align and integrate two slices from 

stage 54 and stage 57  (Fig. 3e) . Through alignment, most spots were accurately matched 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

despite substantial variation in spot numbers and types across slices  (Fig. 3f) , and 

dynamic changes in cell identities during development were successfully captured (e.g., 

mature nptxEX at stage 57 could be traced back to immature nptxEX at stage 54). In 

parallel, SpatialFuser effectively corrected batch effects while preserving exp ression 

pattern differences among distinct cell -types  (Fig. 3g) .

Interestingly, a large region of development -related ependymoglial cells  (dEGCs )

was enriched with less -aligned cells during the iterative training process of SpatialFuser 

(Supplementary Fig. 9) . We hypothesize that this may be attributed to intra -regional 

heterogeneity within the seemingly homogeneous dEGCs domain. For instance, 

previously unannotated substructures may have emerged during telencephalon 

development from stage 54 to stage 57, redu cing cross -slice similarity within this region 

and thereby hindering the formation of high -quality  correspondence s. To support this 

hypothesi s, we performed Mclust clustering on the integrated embeddings and 

identified a distinct subpopulation within the dEGCs domain (Cluster 1 7) (Fig. 3h) ,

likely reflecting emerging subregional or functional differentiation. Further spatial 

differential analysis confirmed that this subregion exhibit s a unique spatial expression 

pattern, with FGF17, STRA6, and SLIT2 significantly enriched  (Fig. 3i) . These genes 

are known to play key roles in embryonic development and neurodevelopmental 

processes [41 -44 ], aligning well with the spatial distribution and potential functions of 

the subregion. Collectively, these findings demonstrate SpatialFuser’s capability to 

reveal dynamic cellular changes through spatiotemporal integrative analysis. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 3. Spatial alignment across consecutive tissue slices and non -consecutive 

slices from different developmental stages.  a,  Alignment of slices 1 and 2 from the 

BaristaSeq mouse visual cortex dataset, colo ured by region labels (300 alignment 

pairs shown for clarity).  b,  Sankey plot showing region type correspondence based on 

alignments from SpatialFuser, SPACEL, STAligner, and SLAT for slices 1 and 2 of 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the BaristaSeq dataset.  c,  UMAP visualizations of integration results for SpatialFuser, 

SPACEL, STAligner, and SLAT on slices 1 and 2 of the BaristaSeq dataset, colo ured 

by region labels (top) and batch labels (bottom).  d,  ARI scores before and after 

integration for domain identification in slices 1 and 2 of the BaristaSeq dataset.  e, 

Alignment of Stage 54 and Stage 57 slices from the Stereo -seq axolotl regenerative 

telencephalon dataset, colo ured by region labels (300 alignment pairs shown for 

clarity).  f,  Sankey plot showing region type correspondence based on alignments from 

SpatialFuser for Stage 54 and Stage 57 slices of the Stereo -seq dataset.  g,  UMAP 

visualizations of integration results for SpatialFuser on Stage 54 and Stage 57 slices 

of the Stereo -seq dataset, colo ured by region labels (top) and batch labels (bottom).  h, 

Spatial domains in the Stage 57 slice of the Stereo -seq dataset identified by Mclust 

clustering on SpatialFuser -integrated embeddings.  i,  Expression distributions of 

FGF17, STRA6, an d SLIT2, specifically enriched in a potential subregional structure 

within the dEGCs region of the Stage 57 slice from the Stereo -seq dataset. 

Effective and efficient spatial multi -omics integration enables complementary 

tissue profiling 

Incorporating multiple modalities into the analysis of biological samples holds great 

potential for deepening our understanding of the mechanisms underlying cellular and 

tissue organization [45 ]. To evaluate the multi -omics integration capability of 

SpatialFuser, we applied it to spatial ATAC –RNA -seq data from an embryonic day 13 

(E13) mouse embryo section  (Fig. 4a) , in which the telencephalon region was annotated 

based on marker genes for the cortical plate, ventricular zone, and striatal primordium 

(Fig. 4b) , and compared its performance with current state -of -the -art methods.  Leiden 

clustering of the integrated embeddings from all models recovered the Eye region 

(cluster 9 in both RNA and ATAC Leiden clustering)  (Fig. 4 c). However, only 

SpatialFuser and SpatialGlue  preserved the layered organization of the  hindbrain with 

high structural fidelity. Focusing on the dorsolateral telencephalon in the forebrain, 

SpatialFuser and MISO uniquely distinguished the developing pallial cortical plate 

from the pallial ventricular zone. This neuronal population was previous ly shown to be 

difficult to resolve using either modality alone, as demonstrated by joint epigenomic 

and transcriptomic profiling in a prior study  [14 ]. During embryonic telencephalon 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

development, key transcription factors exhibit spatial gradients rather than sharply 

defined boundaries  [17 , 46 ]. To quantify the spatial concordance between identified CP 

clusters and CP marker enrichment, we evaluated cluster –marker agreement using 

purity and coverage metrics across a range of marker -enriched spot definitions  (see 

Methods) . Although the cortical plate cluster identified by MISO shows near maximal 

marker purity  (Fig. 4d,  left ), it is largely restricted to localized expression hotspots. In 

contrast, SpatialFuser delineates a broader and spatially continuous region, maintaining 

a high level of marker purity while achieving substantially higher coverage score  (Fig. 

4d, right) , consistent with the gradual transitions expected across developing cortical 

territories. By comparison, MultiGATE produces less distinct reg ional boundaries 

despite achieving overall modality alignment  (Fig. 4 c and  Supplementary Fig.  10),

whereas SIMO fails to clearly resolve the original anatomical domains even when label 

information is incorporated during training  (Fig. 4 c). We also observed that increasing 

the number of  mapp ed cells in SIMO  leads  to  increasing spatial disorganization and 

reduced domain consistency  (Supplementary Fig.  11 ).

At embryonic day 13, chromatin accessibility may not fully resolve all  the  cell 

types defined by transcriptional profiles, potentially due to lineage priming [47 , 48 ], as 

some genes exhibit differing spatial signal patterns between ATAC and RNA 

modalities. For instance, Vax2 (ventral retina marker [49 ]), Kcnj10 (ventricular zone 

and astrocyte progenitor marker [50 ]), Pax6 (cortical progenitor and optic vesicle 

marker [51 ]), and Myt1l (hindbrain neuron marker [52 ]) displayed relatively low RNA 

expression in their respective regions at  stage  E13 in the mouse embryo, despite marked 

chromatin accessibility. For methods that reconstruct omics features, we further 

evaluated their ability to capture complementary expression patterns by integrating 

chromatin accessibility with transcriptomic signals . Compared with MultiGATE and 

SIMO, SpatialFuser preferentially enhances the detection of weakly expressed yet 

epigenetically informative genes  (Fig. 4e) . However, it is important to note that while 

SpatialFuser functions as an integrative enhancemen t tool that leverages 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

complementary information from different modalities to reconstruct a more 

comprehensive and biologically meaningful gene expression landscape, it does not 

explicitly differentiate whether low RNA expression arises from true lineage priming 

or technical lim itations in transcript detection. Disentangling these causes requires 

further experimental validation. 

As spatial multi -omics datasets continue to increase in scale and complexity, 

computational efficiency becomes increasingly important for integration methods. We 

therefore compared training runtime across methods using the E13 mouse embryo 

spatial ATAC RNA -seq dataset  (see  Methods) , and the results show that SpatialFuser 

required less training time than all other approaches  (Fig. 4f) . Of note, MultiGATE is 

implemented in legacy software environments and built on an early version of the 

TensorFlow framework,  which posed practical challenges for deployment on our GPU 

systems. Therefore, MultiGATE was trained on CPU, with each run requiring 

approximately 1.5 to 2 hours.  Together , our findings indicate that SpatialFuser  can 

effectively  captur e molecular signals associated with transcriptional readiness within 

complex tissue contexts that remain ed  difficult to resolve using unimodal or earlier 

integration approaches. This capability facilitates the identification of emerging cell 

subtypes or transitional cellular states relevant to developmental processes and early 

disease progression. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Fig. 4. Fast and precise integrative analysis of epigenome –transcriptome co -

profiled mouse embryo slice. a,  H&E -stained histological image of spatial ATAC –

RNA -seq data from an E13 mouse embryo, with magnified and annotated views of 

the telencephalon.  b,  Spatial gene expression patterns of marker genes for the cortical 

plate, ventricular zone, and striatal primordium in the telencephalon.  c,  Spatial 

domains identified by Leiden clustering on integrated embeddings or mapped features 

generated by SpatialFuser,  MISO, MultiGATE, SpatialGlue, and SIMO using the E13 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

mouse embryo spatial ATAC –RNA -seq dataset. SpatialFuser, MultiGATE, and MISO 

produce modality -specific representations, whereas SpatialGlue and SIMO learn joint 

representations across modalities.  d,  Purity –Coverage analysis of cortical plate 

marker enrichment under varying percentile thresholds.  e,  Spatial expression patterns 

of Vax2, Kcnj10, Pax6, and Myt1l in the original ATAC -derived gene activity, original 

RNA expression, and reconstructed or mapped RNA profiles produced by 

SpatialFuser, MultiGATE, and  SIMO after integration.  f,  Computational efficiency 

comparison of methods evaluated on the E13 mouse embryo spatial ATAC –RNA -seq 

dataset. 

Cross -resolution integration of weakly correlated  spatial  modalities  advances 

tissue -level information 

Compared to the one -to -one correspondence between the genome and transcriptome, 

the linkage between the proteome or metabolome and the transcriptome or epigenome 

is generally weak [53 ], as protein abundance and metabolite levels are influenced by 

multiple regulatory processes beyond gene expression, such as translation, post -

translational modifications, and cellular environment [54 , 55 ]. To explore cross -

modality integration under such weakly correlated conditions, we applied SpatialFuser 

to integrate and align transcriptomic (MAGIC -seq [11 ]), proteomic (PLATO [15 ]), and 

metabolomic (MALDI -MSI [7]) data  under varying resolutions  obtained from 

consecutive mouse cerebellum tissue slices. Result shows SpatialFuser effectively 

captured shared spatial molecular patterns across different omics layers and 

successfully corrected modality biases while preserving true biological variation,  as 

evidenced by the spatial domains identified through Louvain clustering of the latent 

embeddings, which aligned well with the original anatomical annotations  (Fig. 5a) .

Most spots across the tissue were well aligned, with high alignment similarity scores 

(Supplementary Fig. 13) and matching accuracy (Supplementary Fig.  14 ,

Transcriptome –Proteome: 0.84, Transcriptome –Metabolome: 0.75, Proteome –

Metabolome: 0.86). It is noteworthy that manual annotation is affected by the 

granularity and distribution discrep ancies across modalities. For example, although 

MAGIC -seq transcriptomic data and PLATO proteomic data share the same spatial 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

coordinates, the matching rate of their original labels is only 83%, which undermines 

the reliability of using label -matching accuracy as a metric to evaluate spot -to -region 

mapping performance. By visualizing the embeddings with UMAP, we further 

demonstra te SpatialFuser’s ability to accurately align the same cell types across 

different omics modalities,  as spots of the same type are consistently co -localized in the 

embedding space, even under weak cross -modality cellular correspondence  (Fig. 5b) .

Due to differences in spatial resolution and barcode density, the MALDI -MSI slice 

captured 3908 spots, which is significantly more than the 1677 spots in the 

transcriptomic and proteomic datasets, thereby enabling finer -grained tissue domain 

annotations. T hrough cross -modality and cross -resolution integration and alignment, 

SpatialFuser  is  able to leverage the detailed histological distribution patterns in the 

metabolomic data to enhance the delineation of  fiber  tracts in the spatial transcriptomic 

data, wh ich were previously difficult to resolve  (Fig. 5c) .

To assess whether the reconstructed transcriptomic profiles preserved biologically 

relevant spatial patterns, we evaluated the ability of known canonical oligodendrocyte 

marker genes (Cldn11 [56 ], Mog [57 ], and Cnp [58 ]) to discriminate the originally 

annotated  fiber tracts before and after integration. ROC curve analysis showed that the 

reconstructed features achieved higher AUC scores in distinguishing the  fiber tracts 

defined by the original annotation  (Fig. 5d),  indicating improved concordance with 

expected spatial expression patterns. Notably, when using Louvain -identified Fiber 

tracts cluster as the reference, we observed even higher AUC scores  (Fig. 5e) . The 

strong spatial concordance between the reconstructed marker gene expression patterns 

and the refined  anatomical delineation supports the biological validity of the finer -

grained structure revealed by the  SpatialFuser  integration. 

Together, these results demonstrate the versatility of SpatialFuser in decoding 

complex biological systems through spatial multi -omics integration. By bridging 

modalities with different biological meanings and technical characteristics, 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

SpatialFuser enables deeper  and  more comprehensive tissue profiling across resolutions, 

offering a powerful tool for spatial systems biology. 

Fig. 5. SpatialFuser effectively integrates and aligns cross -resolution datasets 

from consecutive mouse cerebellum tissue slices across transcriptomic, 

proteomic, and metabolomic  data . a,  Pair -wise integration and alignment (300 

alignment pairs shown for clarity) of transcriptomic (MAGIC -seq), proteomic 

(PLATO), and metabolomic (MALDI -MSI) data from consecutive mouse cerebellum 

tissue slices, with Louvain clustering for tissue domain detection.  b, UMAP 

visualizations of modality bias correction results from  SpatialFuser on pairwise 

integrations of the mouse cerebellum datasets, colo ured by region labels (top) and 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

batch labels (bottom).  c,  Distribution of the original Fiber tract annotation in the 

MAGIC -seq slice and the corresponding RNA –metabolome integration result 

(Louvain cluster 2), alongside spatial expression patterns of the Fiber tract marker 

genes Cldn11, Mog, and Cnp.  d,  ROC curves of marker gene expression before and 

after integration for distinguishing the original Fiber tract annotation.  e,  ROC curves 

of reconstructed marker gene expression distinguishing Louvain -detected Fiber tracts 

(cluster 2)  and  th e original Fiber tract annotation. 

Discussion 

Spatial technologies are expanding into multi -omics, enabling researchers to measure 

transcriptomics, epigenomics, proteomics, metabolomics, and other molecular layers at 

defined tissue locations. Underlying this is an unprecedented opportunity to integrat e

and interpret molecular  features  from diverse complementary perspectives for a deeper 

understanding of biological mechanisms within microenvironment [59 -61 ]. In this study, 

we  propose  SpatialFuser, a deep learning -based  correspondence -driven  framework 

designed for detailed molecular profiling within individual tissue sections and cross -

modality, multi -sample integrative analysis of spatial multi -omics data. Through 

benchmarking on real spatial multi -omics datasets generated by diverse technolo gies, 

we show that SpatialFuser outperforms existing state -of -the -art methods in spatial 

domain detection, consecutive slice alignment, and spatial multi -omics data integration. 

Notably, we further demonstrate SpatialFuser’s unique capa bility for cross -resolution 

integration of weakly correlated modalities, which has not been previously established. 

While each component of SpatialFuser can function independently, their synergistic 

combination within the framework provides a holistic and  streamlined solution for 

accurate spatial interpretation, robust cross -modality integration, and effective cross -

slice alignment of spatial multi -omics data. 

To accommodate diverse input modalities, SpatialFuser introduces MCGATE to 

learn unified representations from multi -platform spatial omics data. Unlike methods 

such as STAGATE and SEDR that primarily focus on local information propagation, 

MCGATE employs a  multi -head collaborative attention mechanism that further 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

captures long -range feature  correspondence s in the embedding space, enabling more 

accurate identification of spatially coherent patterns. The effectiveness of this design is 

supported by ablation and interpretability analyses, and beyond performance gains, the 

architecture improves model transparenc y while providing new perspectives for 

interpreting spatial molecular organization. 

SpatialFuser introduces foundational ly  methodological advances and broader 

utility in cross -slice alignment and multi -modality integration compared with previous 

approaches. Unlike alignment methods such as STAligner and SPACEL, SpatialFuser 

uses slice -specific embeddings without requiring mat ched feature spaces across 

technologies and applies a more relaxed alignment strategy to model cross -slice 

correspondences, thereby better supporting scenarios involving different technologies. 

Beyond alignment, integr ation  tools  such as MISO, SpatialGlue, and MultiGATE are 

designed for co -profiled data measured on the same tissue section and often assume 

similar cellular composition or strong biological priors. Rather than relying on one -to -

one molecular correspondences across mo dalities, SpatialFuser captures correlated 

spatial molecular patterns in the embedding space to correct batch effects and modality 

biases. It learns latent correspondences directly from data and is built to handle unpaired 

sections across differ ent samples, resolutions, technologies, and developmental stages, 

extending multi -omics analysis to a broader range of real -world scenarios. 

A current limitation of SpatialFuser lies in memory footprint  of  multi -head 

collaborative attention mechanism. The lack of memory -efficient parallel operations 

for high -dimensional sparse matrices in current deep learning frameworks leads to 

substantial GPU memory demands for large dataset s [62 , 63 ]. We anticipate that 

ongoing advances in hardware and software will mitigate these bottlenecks. Moreover, 

we plan to develop more efficient sparse computation strategies  in  future versions of 

SpatialFuser to better support analyses of increasingly large tissue sections at higher 

spatial resolution.  In fact, SpatialFuser remains generally fast. With sparse -optimized 

single -head mode, MCGATE embedding generation requires only ~30 seconds per 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

DLPFC slice on an NVIDIA GeForce RTX 4090 GPU (24 GB), and integration 

efficiency is reflected in our benchmarking results. 

Although image -derived features can improve tissue region identification and 

spatial molecular pattern recognition [25 , 64 ], SpatialFuser does not currently include a 

dedicated histology embedding module, as histological images are not consistently 

available across spatial omics platforms, limiting the general applicability of image -

dependent models. Moreover, effective image  representation learning often relies on 

large neural networks with substantial training costs. In contrast, SpatialFuser is 

intentionally lightweight. In lower -throughput modality analysis scenarios such as 

CODEX, SpatialFuser may involve only a few thousa nd trainable parameters, which 

supports its deployment in resource -constrained settings. 

In summary,  SpatialFuser  does not merely incrementally improve upon existing 

methods, but also provides a versatile, robust, and broadly applicable framework that 

empowers researchers to integrate spatial multi -omics data across a wide spectrum of 

experimental designs, beyond the  limitations of current methods. To facilitate broad 

adoption by the research community, we have released the SpatialFuser package along 

with detailed tutorials and demo cases  for all  presented experiments  at  our GitHub 

repository  https://github.com/liwz -lab/SpatialFuser .

Methods 

Data Preprocessing 

Filtering and normalization.  SpatialFuser takes  cellular  information and spatial 

coordinate information of spatial multi -omics data as input, and we refer to the cells or 

the capture voxels in omics experiment as spots. We first filtered spots lacking valid 

annotations for reliable analysis. Spatial coordinates  of each spot were normalized to 

[0,1] to better incorporate spatial information into the model.  The normalization of 

cellular  information matrices was conducted using Scanpy [65 ] package. For each slice, 

we normalized the raw cellular matrix by total counts across all features, scaling each 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

spot to 10,000 total counts, and applied a log -transformation to the normalized matrix 

for better variance stabilization and interpretability of expression differences.  For 

dataset generated from sequencing -based and high -throughput AI -enhanced  technology ,

we select the top 3000 spatial variable features. 

Construction of graph inputs.  SpatialFuser models given spatial multi -omics data as 

graph -structured inputs  𝒢  = {(𝑥 𝑖 , 𝑠 𝑖 ), 𝑖  = 1,2, ⋯ , 𝑁 }, where  𝑁  is the number of spots 

within slice,  𝑥 𝑖  ∈ ℝ𝑑  is pre -processed feature of spot  𝑖 , and  𝑆 𝑖  is adjacency spots of 

spot  𝑖  constructed by K -Nearest N eighbour s algorithm  (KNN) based on spatial 

coordinates. We adjust the parameter K adaptively based on spatial domain 

heterogeneity and connectivity patterns across different multi -omics scenarios and 

platforms. 

MCGATE for multi -omics data 

Encoder.  Given input  𝒢 , the  𝑘 -th encoder layer  (𝑘  ∈ {1,2, ⋯ , 𝐿 }) of spot  𝑖  fi rst 

adaptively learns the pairwise relationship between its adjacent spots  𝑗 , represented by 

an edge weight in the graph structure. The edge weight  𝑒 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

at layer  𝑘  is computed as: 

𝑒 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

= 𝑆𝑖𝑔𝑚𝑜𝑖𝑑  (𝑉 1

> 𝑘 𝑇

(𝑊 1

> 𝑘

𝑥 𝑖 

> 𝑘 −1

) + 𝑉 2

> 𝑘 𝑇

(𝑊 1

> 𝑘

𝑥 𝑗 

> 𝑘 −1

)) , (1)

where  𝑊 1 is a learnable weight matrix,  𝑉 1 and  𝑉 2 are trainable weight vectors. To 

obtain the local attention weights for information aggregation, the edge  𝑒 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

weights 

are normalized using a sparse  𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥  function over  𝑆 𝑖  of spot  𝑖 :

𝑎𝑡𝑡 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

= 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑗 ∈𝑆 𝑖  (𝑒 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

). (2)

Based  on local  attention weights, the encoder aggregates information from  𝑆 𝑖  of spot 

𝑖  to compute the smoothed representation  𝑥 ′𝑘  as: 

𝑥 ′𝑘  = 𝐵𝑁  (∑ 𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑘
> 𝑗 ∈𝑆 𝑖

(𝑊 1

> 𝑘

𝑥 𝑗 

> 𝑘 −1

)) , (3)

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

where  𝐵𝑁  denotes batch normalization [66 ], which stabilizes training and accelerates 

convergence [67 ].

Finally, a feedforward transformation with residual connection is applied to 

introduce nonlinearity and enhance the model’s representational capacity: 

𝑥 𝑖  

> 𝑘

= 𝐵𝑁 (𝜎 (𝑊 2

> 𝑘

𝑥 ′𝑘  + 𝑏 𝑘 ) + 𝑥 ′𝑘 ), (4)

where  𝑊 2 is a learnable weight matrix,  𝑏  is a trainable bias, and  𝜎  is a customized 

activation function. The encoder takes the pre -processed feature vector  𝑥 𝑖  

> 0

as input, 

and the output of the final layer  𝑥 𝑖  

> 𝐿

serves as the low -dimensional feature embedding 

learned by MCGATE. 

Adaptive  adjacency  expansion  layer . Based on the assumption that spatially adjacent 

cells exhibit high feature similarity, previous methods typically rely on convolutional 

or neighbo urhood -based attention mechanisms for information aggregation. However, 

our experiments show that in spatial omics data, the spot pairs with the highest feature 

similarity are often not spatially adjacent. This suggests that relying solely on local 

features  as regularization may limit the model’s ability to capture true spatial expression 

patterns, highlighting  the importance of long -range information propagation for 

accurate embedding learning. However, computing global attention within the encoder 

becomes increasingly expensive as the number of spots grows, making it impractical 

for large -scale slices learning.  To address this, we introduce a collaborative attention 

mechanism  that efficiently models spatial expression patterns in the low -dimensional 

embedding space. 

The  adaptive adjacency expansion layer first computes cosine similarity between 

spot embeddings  as  follow: 

𝐶𝑜 𝑠 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙

= 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑆 𝑖  ( 𝑥 𝑖  

> 𝐿

∙ 𝑥 𝑗 

> 𝐿

‖𝑥 𝑖 

> 𝐿

‖ ∙ ‖𝑥 𝑗 

> 𝐿

‖) ,

𝐶𝑜 𝑠 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔

= 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑆 𝑖  

> 𝑐

( 𝑥 𝑖  

> 𝐿

∙ 𝑥 𝑗 

> 𝐿

‖𝑥 𝑖 

> 𝐿

‖ ∙ ‖𝑥 𝑗 

> 𝐿

‖) ,

(5)

where  𝑆 𝑖  denotes the spatial neighbo urhood of spot  𝑖 , and  𝑆 𝑖  

> 𝑐

denotes the set of non -

spatial neighbors. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

The local cosine similarity matrix  𝐶𝑜 𝑠 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙

is fed back to the encoder to enhance 

the local attention mechanism previously defined in Equation (2): 

𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎 𝑙 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

= 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝑆 𝑖  (𝐶𝑜 𝑠 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎𝑙

∗ 𝑒 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

), (6)

where  𝑒 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

is the attention coefficient computed at  𝑘 -th encoder layer. 

For each spot  𝑖 , the adaptive adjacency expansion layer selects the mutual nearest 

neighbo urs [68 ] (MNNs) spots with highest similarity outside its spatial neighbourhood 

from  𝐶𝑜 𝑠 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑙𝑜𝑛𝑔

, generating a sparse long -range  correspondence  matrix that defines 

reliable pathways for  distant  information propagation.  During  training process , l et  𝐺 𝑖 

denote s the set of long -range neighbours for spot  𝑖 , the long -range attention weights 

are computed as: 

𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑙𝑜𝑛 𝑔 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

= 𝑆𝑜𝑓𝑡𝑚𝑎𝑥 𝐺 𝑖  (𝑒 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

). (7)

The collaborative attention weights are then defined as the linear addition of local and 

long -range attention: 

𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑐 𝑜 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

= 𝛼  𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑙𝑜𝑛 𝑔 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

+ (1 − 𝛼 )𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑙𝑜𝑐𝑎 𝑙 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

, (8)

where  𝛼  ∈ [0,1] (default  𝛼  = 0) is a slice -specific  hyperparameter controlling the 

relative influence of long -range  correspondence  during information aggregation. By 

integrating long -range and local attention, the adaptive adjacency expansion layer 

enables efficient global information propagation and aggregation, thereby enhancing 

MCGATE’s ability to learn meaningful spatial expressi on patterns in spatial omics data. 

Decoder.  Symmetric to the encoder, the  𝑘  -th decoder layer  (𝑘  ∈ {1,2, ⋯ , 𝐿 } )

reconstructs the representation of spot  𝑖  as follows: 

𝑥 ̂𝑖  

> 𝑘 −1

= 𝜎  (𝑊 ̂1 

> 𝑘

(∑ 𝑎𝑡𝑡 ̂𝑐 𝑜 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑘
> 𝑗 ∈𝑆 𝑖

𝑥 ̂𝑗 

> 𝑘

)) . (9)

The decoder takes the low -dimensional feature embedding  xL as input and outputs the 

reconstructed low -noise representation  𝑥 ̂𝑖 

> 0

, which approximates the original data. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

To reduce the risk of overfitting, MCGATE adopts a parameter sharing strategy 

between the encoder and  the  decoder. Specifically, for the  𝑘 -th decoder layer,  we  set 

𝑊 ̂1 

> 𝑘

= 𝑊 1 

> 𝑘 𝑇

and  𝑎𝑡𝑡 ̂𝑐 𝑜 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

= 𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑐 𝑜 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘

to share both transformation matrices and 

attention weights.  However, the decoder does not replicate the feedforward structure of 

the encoder, in order to prevent overly rigid architectural symmetry, which may 

constrain the model’s expressiveness. 

The training of MCGATE is driven by a reconstruction objective, which optimizes 

the low -dimensional embeddings through minimization of the mean squared error 

(MSE) loss between input and decoder output: 

𝐿𝑜𝑠 𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑐  = 1

𝑁  ∑‖𝑥 𝑖  

> 0

− 𝑥 ̂𝑖 

> 0

‖2

> 𝑁
> 𝑖 =1

, (10 )

where  𝑁  is the total number of spots. 

Multi -head  attention.  Inspired by previous works [69 ], MCGATE incorporates multi -

head attention mechanism to enable more fine -grained information aggregation by 

partitioning input features into multiple sub -space. In the  𝑘 -th encoder layer  (𝑘  ∈

{1,2, ⋯ , 𝐿 }), the  ℎ-th collaborative attention weight  (ℎ ∈ {1,2, ⋯ , 𝐻 }) between spots 

𝑖  and  𝑗 , denoted  𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑐 𝑜 𝑖𝑗  

> 𝑘 ,ℎ

, is computed in parallel using independent parameters  𝑊 1

> 𝑘 ,ℎ

,

𝑉 1

> 𝑘 ,ℎ

, and  𝑉 2

> 𝑘 .ℎ

. Notably, in the adaptive adjacency expansion layer, cosine similarity 

is also computed separately in each subspace, ensuring that feature aggregation in each 

head captures the diversity of underlying feature structures. 

Under the multi -head attention paradigm, the overall information aggregation 

process in both encoder and decoder is realized by concatenating the outputs of multiple 

parallel attention heads. The aggregation formula in the encoder (extending Equation 

3) is :

𝑥 ′𝑘  = 𝐵𝑁 

(

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡 ℎ=1 

> 𝐻

(∑ 𝑎𝑡 𝑡 𝑐 𝑜 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑘 ,ℎ
> 𝑗 ∈𝑆 𝑖

(𝑊 1

> 𝑘 ,ℎ

𝑥 𝑗 

> 𝑘 −1,ℎ

))

)

. (11 )

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Similarly, the decoder propagation process (extending Equation 9) becomes: 

𝑥 ̂𝑖  

> 𝑘 −1

= 𝜎 

(

𝐶𝑜𝑛𝑐𝑎𝑡 ℎ=1 

> 𝐻

(𝑊 ̂1 

> 𝑘 ,ℎ

(∑ 𝑎𝑡𝑡 ̂𝑐 𝑜 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝑘 ,ℎ
> 𝑗 ∈𝑆 𝑖

𝑥 ̂𝑗 

> 𝑘 ,ℎ

))

)

. (12)

Due to the lack of efficient sparse multi -channel tensor operations in deep learning 

frameworks (e.g., PyTorch [69 ]), the multi -head attention mechanism often leads to 

high GPU memory usage. To ensure scalability on large spatial multi -omics datasets, 

MCGATE adopts sparse tensor operations in the single -head mode to effectively reduce 

memory usage and computational cos t during training. 

Matching layer 

SpatialFuser models the alignment of spatial omics  slices  as a graph matching problem, 

which is essentially a classic optimal transport task. The core objective is to find an 

optimal coupling matrix  that defines cross -slice correspondence s by minimizing the 

Wasserstein distance [70 ] between embedding distributions.  Let the low -dimensional 

embeddings of the two slices be  𝐸 1 ∈ ℝ𝑛 ×𝑑 ′

and  𝐸 2 ∈ ℝ𝑚 ×𝑑 ′

, SpatialFuser 

introduces spatial proximity constraints to define a similarity measure across slices: 

𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) = {

𝐸 1[𝑖 ] ∙ 𝐸 2[𝑗 ]

‖𝐸 1[𝑖 ]‖ ∙ ‖𝐸 2[𝑗 ]‖ + 1

2𝜏  + 10 −6 , 𝑖𝑓  ‖𝐶 𝑜𝑜 1[𝑖 ] − 𝐶 𝑜𝑜 1[𝑗 ]‖2 ≤ r

0, 𝑜𝑡 ℎ𝑒𝑟𝑤𝑖𝑠𝑒 

(13 )

where the indices  𝑖  ∈ {1,2, ⋯ , 𝑛 } and  𝑗  ∈ {1,2, ⋯ , 𝑚 } denote arbitrary spots on each 

slice,  𝜏  is a temperature coefficient,  𝐶 𝑜𝑜 1[𝑖 ] and  𝐶 𝑜𝑜 2[𝑗 ] represent their 

corresponding spatial coordinate vectors, and  r denotes the spatial neighbo urhood 

radius, restricting the cross -sample  correspondence s to a local spatial window. 

Based on the similarity matrix defined in Equation (13), SpatialFuser formulates the 

alignment task as the following optimal transport problem: 

argmax 

> T∈𝒯

∑ ∑ 𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖 (𝑖 , 𝑗 )𝑇 𝑖𝑗 

> 𝒎
> 𝒋 =𝟎
> 𝒏
> 𝒊 =𝟎

+ 𝜆  ∙ 𝑅𝑒𝑔 (𝑇 ) , (14 )

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

where  𝑇  ∈ [0,1]𝑛 ×𝑚  is the soft coupling matrix to be optimized . The set  𝒯  =

{𝑇  ∈ ℝ𝑛 ×𝑚  |𝑇 1𝑚  ≤ 1𝑛 , 𝑇 𝑇 1𝑛  ≤ 1𝑚 } defines the feasible region.  𝑅𝑒𝑔 (⋅) denotes the 

entropy regularizer, and  𝜆  is its weighting factor. SpatialFuser employs the Sinkhorn 

algorithm [71 ] to solve this linear program via efficient iterative updates. 

While Equation ( 14 ) implicitly assumes that every spot in the two slices can be 

reliably matched, heterogeneous spatial omics datasets often differ in cell -type 

composition , resolution , and batch size. A robust alignment algorithm should therefore 

tolerate unmatched spots. To address this, SpatialFuser introduces a relaxed mapping 

strategy by augmenting the original similarity matrix  𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖  ∈ ℝ𝑛 ×𝑚  defined in 

Equation (13) with additional dustbin channels, assigning them predefined weights as 

follows: 

𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖 ̅̅̅̅̅̅ (𝑖 , 𝑗 ) = {𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖 (𝑖 , 𝑗 ), 𝑓𝑜𝑟  i ≤ n, j ≤ m

𝑆 𝑏𝑖𝑛 , otherwise  (15)

where  𝑖  ∈ ℤ[0,𝑛 +1] and  𝑗  ∈ ℤ[0,𝑚 +1], 𝑆𝑖𝑚𝑖 ̅̅̅̅̅̅ is the augmented similarity matrix with 

the dustbin channels, and  𝑆 𝑏𝑖𝑛  is a constant weight ( 𝑆 𝑏𝑖𝑛  = 1 in  default ) assigned to 

the dustbin. 

The dustbin channel strategy is a form of relaxation, which essentially converts the 

inequality -constrained problem in Equation (14) into an equality -constrained problem 

with an expanded feasible region: 

𝒯 ̅ = {𝑇 ̅ ∈ ℝ(𝑛 +1)×(𝑚 +1) |𝑇 ̅ 1𝑚 +1 = [1𝑛  

> 𝑇

, 𝑚 ]𝑇  , 𝑇 𝑇 1𝑛  = [1𝑚  

> 𝑇

, 𝑛 ]𝑇 }. (16 )

By allowing unmatched or low -confidence points to be assigned to the dustbin channels, 

the model can adaptively distinguish meaningful  correspondence s from noisy ones, 

thus relaxing the strong assumption of compositional similarity between slice and 

avoiding forcible alignment. 

To ensure sufficient supervision  signal  during early training  stage  and further 

improve matching quality, SpatialFuser introduces a Mutual Top -K Neighbo urs 

(MKNs) strategy based on the soft assignment matrix generated by the Sinkhorn 

algorithm. Specifically, the model initially selects MNNs from the soft couplings to 

construct high -confidence  correspondence s. However, strong batch effects in the early 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

stages may result in insufficient MNNs. To address this, the matching criteria are 

relaxed to include mutual top -K neighbo urs, enhancing the supervision signal and 

ensuring stable training. These MKNs serve as anchors to guide the fusion layer. 

Fusion layer 

In the fusion layer design, a shared multilayer perceptron (MLP) is connected to two 

independent MCGATE modules to project the low -dimensional embeddings of spatial 

omics data from different experimental platforms and modalities into a unified latent 

space . To prevent the model from memorizing batch -specific patterns, the embeddings 

are first ly  concatenated and then randomly permuted along the row prior to being input 

into the MLP, encouraging it to learn a generalizable mapping function. 

The fusion layer employs contrastive learning for spatial multi -omics data 

integration. Specifically, high -confidence cross -slice  correspondence s derived from the 

matching layer serve as anchor -positive pairs to guide the correction of batch effects or 

modality biases. To enhance cell -type discriminability, negative samples are randomly 

drawn from non -neighbo uring regions within the same tissue slice. Given that the 

number of spatial spots typically far exceeds the local neighbo urhood size, this strategy 

is  both efficient and effective in minimizing the risk of false negatives. 

The training process employs an improved triplet loss [31 ] as the modality fusion 

objective, simultaneously promoting the clustering of similar samples (anchor -positive) 

and the separation of dissimilar ones (anchor -negative), while enforcing both absolute 

and relative distance constraints to improve training sta bility: 

𝐿 𝑜𝑠 𝑠 𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑒  = ‖𝐸 𝑖  − 𝐸 𝑝  

> 𝑖

‖2 + 1

𝑁 𝑎 

∑ max  {‖𝐸 𝑖  − 𝐸 𝑝  

> 𝑖

‖2 − ‖𝐸 𝑎  

> 𝑖

− 𝐸 𝑛  

> 𝑖

‖2 + 𝜏 , 0}

> 𝑁 𝑎
> 𝑖 =1

, (17 )

where  𝐸 𝑖  is the fused embedding of spot  𝑖 , serving as anchor,  𝐸 𝑝  

> 𝑖

and  𝐸 𝑛  

> 𝑖

denote the 

embeddings of the corresponding positive and negative spots respectively, and  𝜏  is a 

margin parameter.  To prevent embedding collapse and preserve spatial representational 

fidelity, a reconstruction loss is incorporated into the integration process. Meanwhile, 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

to address potential inconsistencies caused by the dual independent encoder design of 

SpatialFuser, we introduce an embedding direction constraint loss  𝐿 𝑜𝑠 𝑠 𝑑𝑖𝑟  to align the 

global orientation of the representations across slices: 

𝐿 𝑜𝑠 𝑠 𝑑𝑖𝑟  = 1 − 1

𝑛𝑚  ∑ ∑ 𝐸 1[𝑖 ] ∙ 𝐸 2[𝑗 ]

‖𝐸 1[𝑖 ]‖ ∙ ‖𝐸 2[𝑗 ]‖

> 𝑚
> 𝑗 =1
> 𝑛
> 𝑖 =1

. (17 )

The total objective function of the integration process combines the fusion 

objective, the reconstruction loss, and the embedding direction constraint loss, and is 

formulated as: 

𝐿𝑜𝑠 𝑠 𝑖𝑛𝑡𝑒𝑔𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒  = 𝐿𝑜𝑠 𝑠 𝑓𝑢𝑠𝑒  + 𝛽 𝑟𝑒𝑐  𝐿𝑜𝑠 𝑠 𝑟𝑒𝑐  + 𝛽 𝑑𝑖𝑟 𝐿𝑜𝑠 𝑠 𝑑𝑖𝑟 , (18 )

where  𝛽 𝑟𝑒𝑐  and  𝛽 𝑑𝑖𝑟  are the weight of the reconstruction loss and the embedding 

direction constraint loss,  respective ly  𝛽 𝑟𝑒𝑐  = 1 , 𝛽 𝑑𝑖𝑟  = 0.1 in  default). The 

embeddings integrated by the fusion layer are used in the next iteration to guide the 

matching layer in identifying more accurate cross -slice correspondences, enabling 

progressively improved alignment and integration across training rounds. 

Coordinate re -matching  modules ( optional) 

Spatial registration of spot coordinates is a key preparatory step for aligning and 

integrating spatial omics slices. SpatialFuser formulates spatial omics data as 2D point 

clouds and corrects coordinate discrepancies via rigid transformations defined by a 

rotation matrix  𝑀  and a translation  𝑡  . The coordinate registration problem is 

formulated as the following optimization objective: 

𝑎𝑟𝑔𝑚𝑖 𝑛 𝑀 ,𝑡  ‖𝑌 1 − 𝑌 2 ∙ 𝑀  − 𝑡 ‖2, (19)

where  𝑌 1 ∈ ℝ𝑛 ×2 and  𝑌 2 ∈ ℝ𝑚 ×2 denote the spatial coordinate matrices of the two 

datasets to be aligned, with  𝑛  and  𝑚  are the numbers of spots in each set. 

SpatialFuser provides multiple solution strategies to accommodate different 

scenarios. The ICP algorithm is a classical method for solving point cloud registration 

problems [72 , 73 ]. It first establishes spot correspondences by finding the nearest 

neighbo ur for each spot in one slice, and then addresses the above optimization problem 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

via singular value decomposition, iteratively updating the rotation matrix  𝑀  and 

translation vector  𝑡  by minimizing the Euclidean distance between matched spot pairs. 

The ICP algorithm has been widely applied to spatial transcriptomic slice alignment, 

particularly in cases where the slices display well -defined structural grids or regular 

anatomical bounda ries. 

However, ICP is not consistently reliable on slices with uneven spot distributions. 

To address this limitation, SpatialFuser also incorporates the NDT algorithm [74 ],

which models the reference slice by partitioning it into a 2D grid. Each grid cell  𝑉 𝑖 ,𝑗 

contains the spots within its bounds, and a multivariate Gaussian distribution 

𝒩 (𝜇 𝑖 ,𝑗 , Σ𝑖 ,𝑗 ) is fitted to the spots in each non -empty grid cell.  Instead of relying on 

pairwise Euclidean distances, NDT evaluates the Mahalanobis distance between each 

transformed spot  𝑧 𝑡  ∈ ℝ2 and the Gaussian distribution of the corresponding grid cell 

in the reference slice. The coordinate pre -matching is achieved by minimizing the 

cumulative deviation: 

min  

> 𝑅 ,𝑡

∑(𝑧 𝑘  − 𝜇 𝑖 ,𝑗 )𝑇 Σ𝑖 ,𝑗 

> −1

(𝑧 𝑘  − 𝜇 𝑖 ,𝑗 )

> 𝐾
> 𝑘 =1

, (20 )

where  𝐾  is the total spot number of the transformed slice. This probabilistic approach 

enables more robust registration in scenarios involving sparse, noisy, or irregular spot 

distributions [75 ].

Whole -slice  Alignment 

We propose a whole -slice alignment strategy to support downstream analysis and 

performance comparison against existing alignment methods. By default, the slice with 

fewer spatial spots is mapped to the one with more spots. For each spot  𝑖  in the source 

slice, a candidate set is first identified in the target slice by selecting all spots within a 

spatial distance radius  𝑟 , and we further compute the cosine similarity between spot  𝑖 

and its candidate spots based on the fused embeddings. Inspired by previous work [24 ],

we introduce a probabilistic quality control mechanism. Rather than randomly pairing 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

spots across both slices, we randomly sample 1000 spots from the source slice and, for 

each sampled spot, randomly select a nearby spot within radius  𝑟  in the target slice to 

compute cosine similarities, in order to form a stricter null distribution. The 95th 

percentile of this null distribution is used as the threshold for quality control. In 

scenarios where the source and target slices have the same re solution, we retain the 

candidate with the highest similarity score as the final alignment result for each source 

spot. 

Implementation details of  Spatial Fuser 

Spatial  domain  detection  task.  To accommodate datasets with varying complexity, 

SpatialFuser adopts different MCGATE configurations. For high -throughput data such 

as 10X Visium, Stereo -seq, and MAGIC -seq, a two -layer MCGATE is used, with 

hidden dimensions set to 512 and 32 respectively.  For low -throughput data such as 

CODEX and MALDI -MSI, a single -layer MCGATE with 32 hidden units is employed. 

The MCGATE is trained using the Adam optimizer, with the ELU function selected as 

the activation. The model is trained for 500 steps by default, d uring which the Adaptive 

Adjacency Expansion Layer is updated every 100 epochs to refine long -range 

relationships and their associated attention weights. Both the learning rate and the long -

range attention coefficient  𝛼  are customized for each dataset. 

Alignment and  integration  task.  The training process is divided into two stages: pre -

training and contrastive learning. In the pre -training stage, a fusion layer is connected 

to two independent MCGATE encoders and jointly trained with a reconstruction loss 

for 500 epochs  by  default, producing high -quality embeddings for downstream 

alignment and integration.  For slices with semantically similar molecular profiles, 

shared features across slices are used. The matching layer and the fusion layer are then 

iterat ively optimized to align the embeddings into a shared latent space. Specifically, 

the matching layer first identifies anchor -positive pairs based on the pre -trained 

embeddings. These identified pairs are then used to guide the fusion layer in integrating 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

the modalities. By default, triplet pairs are updated every 20 epochs, and this iterative 

process continues until 500 steps. The learning rate is dataset -specific  defined .

Clustering,  differential expression analysis, and  spatial trajectory inference 

Clustering was performed by constructing a shared nearest neighbo ur graph based on 

the spatially resolved data, followed by cluster identification using the Louvain [35 ],

Leiden [34 ], or Mclust [33 ] algorithm s. The default resolution parameter used in 

benchmarking for the Louvain and Leiden clustering algorithms was set to 0.1, while 

for other downstream analyses it was adjusted to the optimal value for each case. 

Cluster biomarkers and differentially expressed  genes between groups were determined 

using the Wilcoxon rank -sum test, as implemented in the rank_genes_groups() function 

of the Scanpy [65 ] package. To infer spatial trajectories, we applied partition -based 

graph abstraction via the paga() function in Scanpy. 

Spatial distribution detection across diverse experimental platforms and 

modalities 

Data description.  The 10X Visium DLPFC dataset [32 ] comprises 12 tissue sections 

from 3 individuals, providing whole -transcriptome coverage with 33,438 gene features. 

Each section contains between 3498 and 4789 spatially resolved spots. The mouse 

somatosensory cortex dataset [2], generated using the osmFISH platform, includes 5328 

spots at single -cell resolution, based on the targeted detection of 33 genes. The CODEX 

human bladder cancer dataset [4] consists of 75 tumo ur tissue sections from 31 patients, 

profiling 35 protein markers across nuclear and membrane compartments. After quality 

control, ~360,000 epithelial cells, ~140,000 immune cells, and ~90,000 stromal cells 

were retained. A 1440 -dimensional feature matrix w as initially constructed using 

statistical summaries (e.g., percentages and quantile distributions) of protein expression. 

For the detection of cell type spatial distributions, the 210308_TMA2_reg6 slice was 

selected, and the average nuclear and membrane e xpression levels of each protein were 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

extracted as input features. All datasets include detailed annotations of tissue regions 

or cell types, which serve as ground truth for evaluation. 

Hyperparameter settings.  The hyperparameters for SpatialFuser were optimized 

through grid search. For all baseline methods, we adopted the recommended data pre -

processing steps and hyperparameter settings as specified in their official 

implementation and documentation  for  DLPFC dataset, except for STAligner. Since 

STAligner’s embedding model structure is very similar to that of STAGATE, we 

referred to the documentation of STAGATE for its parameter settings. The 

documentation links for these methods are  show n as follows: 

- SpaGCN:  https://github.com/jianhuupenn/SpaGCN/blob/master/tutorial/tutorial.md 

- STAGATE:  https://stagate.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html 

- SEDR:  https://sedr.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html 

Hyperparameter robustness.  We tested SpatialFuser’s robustness to  the  key 

hyperparameters of MCGATE including: (1) number of encoder and decoder layers, (2) 

dimension  of layers, (3) dimension of MCGATE embedding. We ran MCGATE on all 

12 slices of  DLPFC  dataset and every experiment was run with different random seeds. 

To identify a suitable attention architecture for the DLPFC dataset, we benchmarked 

different numbers of attention heads based on a selected network structure from the 

robustness testing. 

Spatiotemporal  alignment and integration 

Data description.  The BaristaSeq mouse visual cortex dataset [9] comprises three 

tissue slices with similar domain distributions and morphological structures, containing 

4491, 3545, and 3390 spatial spots, respectively. A total of 78 transcript features were 

retained, along with detailed anatomical region annotations.  Slices 1 and 2 were 

selected for integration and alignment. The Stereo -seq axolotl regenerative 

telencephalon dataset [10 ] includes 18 brain tissue slices with single -cell resolution, 

capturing over 20,000 genes across various stages of regeneration and development. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Two slices from developmental stages 54 and 57, containing 2929 and 4410 spatial 

spots respectively, were selected for alignment and integration. The original 

annotations were used as references for evaluation. 

Hyperparameter settings . The hyperparameters for SpatialFuser were optimized 

through grid search, while the hyperparameter settings for all other methods followed 

the official guidelines and tutorials provided by their respective authors :

- SALT:  https://slat.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorials.html 

- SPACEL:  https://spacel.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html 

- STAligner:  https://staligner.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html 

To ensure a fair comparison of the integration and alignment performance on 

consecutive BaristaSeq slices, we conducted a grid search for several key parameters 

related to both graph construction and network architecture, which are critical yet not 

explici tly specified in the original documentation of the compared methods. 

Specifically, SPACEL constructs the spatial graph using 8 -nearest neighbo urs and 

employs a two -layer  spline, with a hidden layer size of 256 and an output embedding 

dimension of 16  (Supplementary Fig. 6) . STAligner builds the graph using 20 -nearest 

neighbo urs and adopts a two -layer encoder with node dimensions set to 64 and 30, 

respectively  (Supplementary Fig. 7) . For contrastive learning -based integration 

process, the number of nearest neighbo urs used when constructing MNNs was set to 

10. Notably, while typical GCNs tend to suffer from over -fitting, gradient vanishing, 

or over -smoothing beyond 4 –5 layers, SLAT consistently demonstrated improved 

performance with increased depth, achieving its best results with over 20 LGCN layers 

(Supplementary Fig. 8) . Therefore, we report SLAT’s performance using 20 layers 

GCN with mlp_hidden = 128 and hidden_size = 64 in the experiments on the BaristaSeq 

dataset. Before training, SLAT constructs a KNN graph with K=10. 

Spatial ATAC -RNA -seq data integration 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Data description.  The spatial ATAC -RNA -seq dataset [14 ] of the E13 mouse embryo 

comprises 2187 spots with genome -wide co -profiling of epigenome and transcriptome .

The transcriptomic assay measures 15,748 genes, while the epigenomic assay includes 

32,437 accessible chromatin peaks. Gene -level chromatin accessibility was further 

summarized into activity scores for 24,017 genes derived from the ATAC signal. 

Manual ann otation of anatomical regions was not provided by the authors. Instead, the 

dataset includes eight major ATAC -defined clusters, 14 RNA -defined clusters, and 14 

integrative clusters based on joint analysis of spatial ATAC and RNA data. 

Hyperparameter settings . For the high -throughput spatial ATAC -RNA -seq  data, we 

constructed a 4 -nearest neighbo ur graph using the top 3000 spatially variable features, 

which were normalized and log -transformed before being used as input. The number of 

layers in MCGATE was set to two, with hidden dimensions of 512 and 32, respectively. 

We first pre -trained two 4 -head  MCGATE model separately on the ATAC and RNA 

modalities for 500 epochs using a learning rate of 1e -3 and 1e -4. Further, we set the 

reconstruction loss weight  𝛽 𝑟𝑒𝑐  = 50  and the directional loss weight  𝛽 𝑑𝑖𝑟  = 0.1 and 

trained the fusion and matching layers for 500 steps with a learning rate of 1e -4 to 

achieve integration and alignment. For all other methods, we followed the official 

protocols and usage instructions provided by the respective authors: 

- MISO:  https://github.com/kpcoleman/miso/blob/main/tutorial/tutorial.ipynb 

- MultiGATE:  https://multigate.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html 

- SpatialGlue:  https://spatialglue -tutorials.readthedocs.io/en/latest/index.html 

- SIMO:  https://github.com/ZJUFanLab/SIMO/tree/main 

For fair comparison, parameters for each method were tuned within the ranges 

recommended in the original studies. For MISO, pixel_size_raw was estimated using 

the 50 μ m grid resolution and the pixel distance between adjacent spots to align image 

pixel and  physical scales for spot -level image feature extraction. For MultiGATE, the 

learning rate was set to 1e -3 to ensure stable integration , and  model performance 

showed minimal sensitivity to bp_width  (Supplementary Fig.  12 ), which was therefore 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

set to 400. As SpatialGlue uses data -type -specific weight_factors schemes, we applied 

the Spatial -epigenome -transcriptome training mode following the official 

documentation.  For SIMO, we followed the original protocol in which four adjacent 

pixels were merged to construct the spatial transcriptomics data, while the original data 

were treated as single -cell inputs for mapping. Original clustering labels were 

incorporated as str uctural priors during training. We observed that increasing the 

number of mapped cells led to progressive loss of spatial coherence and disruption of 

tissue organization  (Supplementary Fig.  11 ). Therefore, top_num was set to 3 for result 

presentation and c omparison. 

Marker –Region Concordance.  To assess the agreement between identified cortical 

plate (CP) clusters and CP -associated molecular patterns, we derived a CP marker 

enrichment score from ATAC data by aggregating normalized chromatin accessibility 

signals of the canonical CP markers Tbr1  and Satb2 via the score_genes() function in 

Scanpy. Marker -enriched spots were defined using quantile -based thresholds. For each 

threshold, cluster purity was defined as the fraction of cluster spots classified as marker -

enriched , while coverage was defined as the fraction of marker -enriched spots captured 

by the cluster. 

Efficiency Evaluation.  We evaluated computational efficiency on a single NVIDIA 

GeForce RTX 4090 GPU with 24 GB memory. To minimize the influence of hardware -

related variability, the training of each method was repeated five times, and we report 

the mean and standard deviation t o provide a more robust estimate of practical runtime. 

For methods consisting of multiple computational stages, we recorded stage -specific 

runtimes and present stacked runtimes. 

Spatial alignment and integration of weakly correlated modalities across 

resolutions 

Data description.  The multi -omics mouse cerebellum dataset [15 ] comprises three 

consecutive tissue slices, each representing a distinct spatial omics modality: MAGIC -

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

seq for spatial transcriptomics, PLATO for spatial proteomics, and MALDI -MSI for 

spatial metabolomics. The MAGIC -seq slice captured 1677 spatial spots at a resolution 

of 32 μm, profiling 16,116 genes. The PLATO slice provides high -throughput 

proteomic prof iling aligned with the transcriptomic slice, identifying 5722 protein 

groups after AI enhancement and quality control. The MALDI -MSI slice achieves 

higher spatial resolution, capturing 3908 spots with 491 metabolite peaks. Spatial 

domain annotations are av ailable for all three slices, though slight differences exist in 

domain distributions across modalities. Notably, the slices with different resolutions 

exhibit significant discrepancies in spatial coordinates. 

Hyperparameter settings . In the experiments on the multi -omics mouse cerebellum 

dataset, we set K=4 for KNN graph construction and employed the NDT algorithm for 

coordinate registration prior to training. During the pretraining stage, we extracted the 

top 3000 spatially variable f eatures from both the MAGIC -seq transcriptomic slice and 

the PLATO proteomic slice. These features were normalized and log -transformed 

before being input into separate two -layer MCGATE models with hidden dimensions 

of 512 and 32. The number of attention he ads was set to 4, and the models were trained 

for 500 steps using the Adam optimizer with learning rates of 3e -3 and 1e -3, 

respectively. Considering the relatively low throughput of the MALDI -MSI 

metabolomic data, we used all available features as input an d employed a single -layer 

MCGATE model with a 32 -dimensional embedding and four attention heads, trained 

for 500 steps with a learning rate of 5e -4. In the integration and alignment stage, we set 

𝛽 𝑟𝑒𝑐  = 50  and  𝛽 𝑑𝑖𝑟  = 0.1, and trained the fusion and matching layers for 200 steps 

using the Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 3e -3. 

Data  availability 

All experimental data of this study have already been published and are accessible 

within the corresponding articles and public repositories. Specifically, the 10X Visium 

DLPFC dataset is available in the spatialLIBD package [76 ]

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

(http://spatial.libd.org/spatialLIBD ); the osmFISH mouse somatosensory cortex dataset 

is available at  http://linnarssonlab.org/osmFISH/ ; the CODEX human bladder cancer 

dataset is available from the Aquila database [77 ] (https://aquila.cheunglab.org/ ); the 

BaristaSeq mouse visual cortex dataset is available from the SODB database [78 ]

(https://gene.ai.tencent.com/SpatialOmics/ ); the Stereo -seq axolotl regenerative 

telencephalon dataset is available from the STOmicsDB database [79 ]

(https://db.cngb.org/stomics/artista/ ); the spatial ATAC –RNA -seq E13 mouse embryo 

dataset is available at  https://ki.se/en/mbb/oligointernode ; and the spatial multi -omics 

mouse cerebellum dataset is available from the original article. 

Code  availability 

The SpatialFuser framework was implemented in the “ spatial Fuser” Python package, 

which is open -source  for the research community  and  can be  accessible  at 

https://github.com/liwz -lab/SpatialFuser .

Competing interest s

To maximize the impact of this study, Sun Yat -sen University has submitted  a patent 

application to the State Intellectual Property Office of Chia (SIPO). 

Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the grants of National Natural Science Foundation of China 

(92474107 and 32570798), National Key R&D Program of China (2021YFF1200903), 

Major Project of Guangzhou National Laboratory of China (GZNL2024A01003) , and 

Guangdong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foundation of China 

(2022B1515120077). 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Refere nces 

1.  Qiu, X., et al., Spatiotemporal modeling of molecular holograms. Cell, 2024. 

187 (26): p. 7351 -7373. e61. 

2.  Codeluppi, S., et al., Spatial organization of the somatosensory cortex revealed 

by osmFISH. Nature methods, 2018.  15 (11): p. 932 -935. 

3.  Zhang, M., et al., Spatially resolved cell atlas of the mouse primary motor cortex 

by MERFISH. Nature, 2021.  598 (7879): p. 137 -143. 

4.  Black, S., et al., CODEX multiplexed tissue imaging with DNA -conjugated 

antibodies. Nature protocols, 2021.  16 (8): p. 3802 -3835. 

5.  Ptacek, J., et al., Multiplexed ion beam imaging (MIBI) for characterization of 

the tumor microenvironment across tumor types. Laboratory Investigation, 

2020.  100 (8): p. 1111 -1123. 

6.  Williams, C., et al., Spatial insights into tumor immune evasion illuminated with 

1000 -plex RNA profiling with CosMx Spatial Molecular Imager. Cancer Res, 

2023.  83 (6765): p. 10. 

7.  Rohner, T.C., D. Staab, and M. Stoeckli, MALDI mass spectrometric imaging 

of biological tissue sections. Mechanisms of ageing and development, 2005. 

126 (1): p. 177 -185. 

8.  Stå hl, P.L., et al., Visualization and analysis of gene expression in tissue 

sections by spatial transcriptomics. Science, 2016.  353 (6294): p. 78 -82. 

9.  Chen, X., et al., Efficient in situ barcode sequencing using padlock probe -based 

BaristaSeq. Nucleic acids research, 2018.  46 (4): p. e22 -e22. 

10.  Wei, X., et al., Single -cell Stereo -seq reveals induced progenitor cells involved 

in axolotl brain regeneration. Science, 2022.  377 (6610): p. eabp9444. 

11.  Zhu, J., et al., Custom microfluidic chip design enables cost -effective three -

dimensional spatiotemporal transcriptomics with a wide field of view. Nature 

Genetics, 2024.  56 (10): p. 2259 -2270. 

12.  Liao, S., et al., Integrated spatial transcriptomic and proteomic analysis of fresh 

frozen tissue based on stereo -seq. bioRxiv, 2023: p. 2023.04. 28.538364. 

13.  Deng, Y., et al., Spatial profiling of chromatin accessibility in mouse and human 

tissues. Nature, 2022.  609 (7926): p. 375 -383. 

14.  Zhang, D., et al., Spatial epigenome –transcriptome co -profiling of mammalian 

tissues. Nature, 2023.  616 (7955): p. 113 -122. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

15.  Hu, B., et al., High -resolution spatially resolved proteomics of complex tissues 

based on microfluidics and transfer learning. Cell, 2025.  188 (3): p. 734 -748. 

e22. 

16.  Sun, C., et al., Spatially resolved multi -omics highlights cell -specific metabolic 

remodeling and interactions in gastric cancer. Nature Communications, 2023. 

14 (1): p. 2692. 

17.  Chen, A., et al., Spatiotemporal transcriptomic atlas of mouse organogenesis 

using DNA nanoball -patterned arrays. Cell, 2022.  185 (10): p. 1777 -1792. e21. 

18.  Li, H., et al., Spatially resolved genome -wide joint profiling of epigenome and 

transcriptome with spatial -ATAC -RNA -seq and spatial -CUT&Tag -RNA -seq. 

Nature Protocols, 2025: p. 1 -35. 

19.  Hu, J., et al., SpaGCN: Integrating gene expression, spatial location and 

histology to identify spatial domains and spatially variable genes by graph 

convolutional network. Nature Methods, 2021.  18 (11): p. 1342 -1351. 

20.  Dong, K. and S. Zhang, Deciphering spatial domains from spatially resolved 

transcriptomics with an adaptive graph attention auto -encoder. Nature 

Communications, 2022.  13 (1): p. 1739. 

21.  Xu, H., et al., Unsupervised spatially embedded deep representation of spatial 

transcriptomics. Genome Medicine, 2024.  16 (1): p. 12. 

22.  Yang, P., et al., Spatial integration of multi -omics single -cell data with SIMO. 

Nature communications, 2025.  16 (1): p. 1265. 

23.  Zhou, X., K. Dong, and S. Zhang, Integrating spatial transcriptomics data across 

different conditions, technologies and developmental stages. Nature 

Computational Science, 2023.  3(10): p. 894 -906. 

24.  Xia, C. -R., et al., Spatial -linked alignment tool (SLAT) for aligning 

heterogenous slices. Nature Communications, 2023.  14 (1): p. 7236. 

25.  Coleman, K., et al., Resolving tissue complexity by multimodal spatial omics 

modeling with MISO. Nature methods, 2025.  22 (3): p. 530 -538. 

26.  Long, Y., et al., Deciphering spatial domains from spatial multi -omics with 

SpatialGlue. Nature Methods, 2024.  21 (9): p. 1658 -1667. 

27.  Miao, J., et al., MultiGATE: integrative analysis and regulatory inference in 

spatial multi -omics data via graph representation learning. Nature 

Communications, 2025.  16 (1): p. 9403. 

28.  Hu, Y., et al., Benchmarking clustering, alignment, and integration methods for 

spatial transcriptomics. Genome Biology, 2024.  25 (1): p. 212. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

29.  Lais, P., et al., Image guided construction of a common coordinate framework 

for spatial transcriptome data. Scientific Reports, 2025.  15 (1): p. 18074. 

30.  Sarlin, P. -E., et al. Superglue: Learning feature matching with graph neural 

networks. in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and 

pattern recognition. 2020. 

31.  Cheng, D., et al. Person re -identification by multi -channel parts -based cnn with 

improved triplet loss function. in Proceedings of the iEEE conference on 

computer vision and pattern recognition. 2016. 

32.  Maynard, K.R., et al., Transcriptome -scale spatial gene expression in the human 

dorsolateral prefrontal cortex. Nature neuroscience, 2021.  24 (3): p. 425 -436. 

33.  Fraley, C., et al., mclust version 4 for R: normal mixture modeling for model -

based clustering, classification, and density estimation. 2012, Technical report. 

34.  Traag, V.A., L. Waltman, and N.J. Van Eck, From Louvain to Leiden: 

guaranteeing well -connected communities. Scientific reports, 2019.  9(1): p. 1 -

12. 

35.  Blondel, V.D., et al., Fast unfolding of communities in large networks. Journal 

of statistical mechanics: theory and experiment, 2008.  2008 (10): p. P10008. 

36.  Gouin III, K.H., et al., An N -Cadherin 2 expressing epithelial cell subpopulation 

predicts response to surgery, chemotherapy and immunotherapy in bladder 

cancer. Nature communications, 2021.  12 (1): p. 4906. 

37.  Yuan, Y., Spatial heterogeneity in the tumor microenvironment. Cold Spring 

Harbor perspectives in medicine, 2016.  6(8): p. a026583. 

38.  Wolf, F.A., et al., PAGA: graph abstraction reconciles clustering with trajectory 

inference through a topology preserving map of single cells. Genome biology, 

2019.  20 (1): p. 59. 

39.  Long, Y., et al., Spatially informed clustering, integration, and deconvolution 

of spatial transcriptomics with GraphST. Nature Communications, 2023.  14 (1): 

p. 1155. 

40.  Xu, H., et al., SPACEL: deep learning -based characterization of spatial 

transcriptome architectures. Nature Communications, 2023.  14 (1): p. 7603. 

41.  Hoshikawa, M., et al., Structure and expression of a novel fibroblast growth 

factor, FGF -17, preferentially expressed in the embryonic brain. Biochemical 

and biophysical research communications, 1998.  244 (1): p. 187 -191. 

42.  Dhokia, V. and S. Macip, A master of all trades –linking retinoids to different 

signalling pathways through the multi -purpose receptor STRA6. Cell death 

discovery, 2021.  7(1): p. 358. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

43.  Xavier -Neto, J., et al., Signaling through retinoic acid receptors in cardiac 

development: Doing the right things at the right times. Biochimica et 

Biophysica Acta (BBA) -Gene Regulatory Mechanisms, 2015.  1849 (2): p. 94 -

111. 

44.  Hu, H., Chemorepulsion of neuronal migration by Slit2 in the developing 

mammalian forebrain. Neuron, 1999.  23 (4): p. 703 -711. 

45.  Li, Z., et al., Cross -modality representation and multi -sample integration of 

spatially resolved omics data. bioRxiv, 2024: p. 2024.06. 10.598155. 

46.  Zembrzycki, A., et al., Genetic interplay between the transcription factors Sp8 

and Emx2 in the patterning of the forebrain. Neural development, 2007.  2(1): p. 

8. 

47.  Ma, S., et al., Chromatin potential identified by shared single -cell profiling of 

RNA and chromatin. Cell, 2020.  183 (4): p. 1103 -1116. e20. 

48.  Meijer, M., et al., Epigenomic priming of immune genes implicates 

oligodendroglia in multiple sclerosis susceptibility. Neuron, 2022.  110 (7): p. 

1193 -1210. e13. 

49.  Barbieri, A.M., et al., A homeobox gene, vax2, controls the patterning of the 

eye dorsoventral axis. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 1999. 

96 (19): p. 10729 -10734. 

50.  Tang, X., et al., Inwardly rectifying potassium channel Kir4. 1 is responsible for 

the native inward potassium conductance of satellite glial cells in sensory 

ganglia. Neuroscience, 2010.  166 (2): p. 397 -407. 

51.  Manuel, M.N., et al., Regulation of cerebral cortical neurogenesis by the Pax6 

transcription factor. Frontiers in cellular neuroscience, 2015.  9: p. 70. 

52.  Chen, J., et al., MYT1L is required for suppressing earlier neuronal 

development programs in the adult mouse brain. Genome research, 2023.  33 (4): 

p. 541 -556. 

53.  Chen, S., et al., Integration of spatial and single -cell data across modalities with 

weakly linked features. Nature Biotechnology, 2024.  42 (7): p. 1096 -1106. 

54.  Lundberg, E. and G.H. Borner, Spatial proteomics: a powerful discovery tool 

for cell biology. Nature Reviews Molecular Cell Biology, 2019.  20 (5): p. 285 -

302. 

55.  Alexandrov, T., Spatial metabolomics and imaging mass spectrometry in the 

age of artificial intelligence. Annual review of biomedical data science, 2020. 

3(1): p. 61 -87. 

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

56.  Maheras, K.J., et al., Absence of claudin 11 in CNS myelin perturbs behavior 

and neurotransmitter levels in mice. Scientific reports, 2018.  8(1): p. 3798. 

57.  Scolding, N., et al., Myelin -oligodendrocyte glycoprotein (MOG) is a surface 

marker of oligodendrocyte maturation. Journal of neuroimmunology, 1989. 

22 (3): p. 169 -176. 

58.  Lappe -Siefke, C., et al., Disruption of Cnp1 uncouples oligodendroglial 

functions in axonal support and myelination. Nature genetics, 2003.  33 (3): p. 

366 -374. 

59.  Vandereyken, K., et al., Methods and applications for single -cell and spatial 

multi -omics. Nature Reviews Genetics, 2023.  24 (8): p. 494 -515. 

60.  Liu, X., et al., Spatial multi -omics: deciphering technological landscape of 

integration of multi -omics and its applications. Journal of Hematology & 

Oncology, 2024.  17 (1): p. 72. 

61.  Kiessling, P. and C. Kuppe, Spatial multi -omics: novel tools to study the 

complexity of cardiovascular diseases. Genome medicine, 2024.  16 (1): p. 14. 

62.  Smith, S. and G. Karypis. Tensor -matrix products with a compressed sparse 

tensor. in Proceedings of the 5th Workshop on Irregular Applications: 

Architectures and Algorithms. 2015. 

63.  Auddy, A., D. Xia, and M. Yuan, Tensor methods in high dimensional data 

analysis: Opportunities and challenges. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18412, 2024. 

64.  Bergenstrå hle, L., et al., Super -resolved spatial transcriptomics by deep data 

fusion. Nature biotechnology, 2022.  40 (4): p. 476 -479. 

65.  Wolf, F.A., P. Angerer, and F.J. Theis, SCANPY: large -scale single -cell gene 

expression data analysis. Genome biology, 2018.  19 (1): p. 15. 

66.  Ioffe, S. and C. Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network 

training by reducing internal covariate shift. in International conference on 

machine learning. 2015. pmlr. 

67.  Bjorck, N., et al., Understanding batch normalization. Advances in neural 

information processing systems, 2018.  31 .

68.  Haghverdi, L., et al., Batch effects in single -cell RNA -sequencing data are 

corrected by matching mutual nearest neighbors. Nature biotechnology, 2018. 

36 (5): p. 421 -427. 

69.  Vaswani, A., et al., Attention is all you need. Advances in neural information 

processing systems, 2017.  30 .

> .CC-BY-NC 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 21, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2025.09.14.676067 doi: bioRxiv preprint

70.  Panaretos, V.M. and Y. Zemel, Statistical aspects of Wasserstein distances. 

Annual review of statistics and its application, 2019.  6(1): p. 405 -431. 

71.  Cuturi, M., Sinkhorn distances: Lightspeed computation of optimal transport. 

Advances in neural information processing systems, 2013.  26 .

72.  Dong, Z., et al., Registration of large -scale terrestrial laser scanner point clouds: 

A review and benchmark. ISPRS Journal of Photogrammetry and Remote 

Sensing, 2020.  163 : p. 327 -342. 

73.  Umeyama, S., Least -squares estimation of transformation parameters between 

two point patterns. IEEE Transactions on pattern analysis and machine 

intelligence, 2002.  13 (4): p. 376 -380. 

74.  Biber, P. and W. Straß er. The normal distributions transform: A new approach 

to laser scan matching. in Proceedings 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference 

on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS 2003)(Cat. No. 03CH37453). 2003. 

IEEE. 

75.  Magnusson, M., The three -dimensional normal -distributions transform: an 

efficient representation for registration, surface analysis, and loop detection. 

2009, Örebro universitet. 

76.  Pardo, B., et al., spatialLIBD: an R/Bioconductor package to visualize spatially -

resolved transcriptomics data. BMC genomics, 2022.  23 (1): p. 434. 

77.  Zheng, Y., et al., Aquila: a spatial omics database and analysis platform. Nucleic 

Acids Research, 2023.  51 (D1): p. D827 -D834. 

78.  Yuan, Z., et al., SODB facilitates comprehensive exploration of spatial omics 

data. Nature Methods, 2023.  20 (3): p. 387 -399. 

79.  Xu, Z., et al., STOmicsDB: a comprehensive database for spatial 

transcriptomics data sharing, analysis and visualization. Nucleic acids research, 

2024.  52 (D1): p. D1053 -D1061.