Title: Towards Global AI-Driven Cervical Cancer Screening

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.15019v1

Published Time: Tue, 16 Jun 2026 00:25:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# Towards Global AI-Driven Cervical Cancer Screening 

Thuy Nuong Tran a, ∗, Ömer Sümer a, Evangelia Christodoulou a, Lennart Nauschütte b,c , Simon Kalteis d, Martin Paulikat b,c , Esmira Pashayeva e,Klara Steinheuer c, Isabella Borges b, Piotr Kalinowski a, Hermann Bussmann b,c,d , Sieng Sokmney j, Poeung Kuong k, Sathiarany Vong l, Achim Schneider e, Magnus von Knebel-Doeberitz b,c,d , Patrick Godau a,1 , Lena Maier-Hein a,f,g,h,i,1 

> a

Intelligent Medical Systems E130, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 

> b

Department of Applied Tumor Biology, Universitätsklinikum Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany 

> c

Cooperation Unit F210, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany 

> d

PAiCON GmbH, Heidelberg, Germany 

> e

MVZ im Fürstenberg-Karree Berlin, Berlin, Germany 

> f

National Center for Tumor Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany 

> g

Medical Faculty, Heidelberg University, Heidelberg, Germany 

> h

DKFZ Heidelberg, Helmholtz Imaging, Germany 

> i

Faculty of Mathematics and Computer Science, Heidelberg University, Germany 

> j

Soth Nikum District Hospital, Cambodia 

> k

Siem Reap Provincial Hospital, Cambodia 

> l

Ministry of Health, Cambodia 

Abstract 

The global elimination of cervical cancer is a key public health goal set by the World Health Organization (WHO), with screening programs reducing mor-tality by up to 80%. However, access to experts and biopsy services is limited in low- to middle-income countries (LMICs). Deep learning (DL)-based al-gorithms offer promising support for screening, but most existing approaches have been developed and validated on private datasets from single countries. We present the first DL-based approach to cervical cancer screening vali-dated on data from multiple countries. Technically, we phrase the problem 

> ∗

Corresponding author: t.tran@dkfz-heidelberg.de 

> 1

These authors contributed equally as last authors. 

> arXiv:2606.15019v1 [cs.CV] 12 Jun 2026

of detecting and classifying lesions in colposcopy images as a multi-task learn-ing problem, in which we simultaneously perform image-level classification and lesion segmentation. Our model was trained on a private data set of acid stain colposcopy images with manually generated lesion segmentation masks and corresponding histopathological results, employing extensive data augmentation to address image variability. In an in-distribution validation with pathology results serving as ground truth, our algorithm outperformed medical experts (Balanced Accuracy: 0.68 vs 0.64) in CIN1- (Cervical in-traepithelial neoplasia grade 1 or lower) versus CIN2+ (grade 2 or higher) classification. External validation on four colposcopy data sets from four countries featuring radical differences in prevalence and patient characteris-tics yielded superior performance of our method compared to baseline meth-ods. Performance variability across countries was high with AUC values ranging from 0.54 - 0.80. Overall, algorithm performance varied with age, transformation zone (cervical area most prone to lesion development), pres-ence of comorbidities and pathognomonic signs, with comorbidities having by far the largest negative effect. Future work should focus on improving model robustness and generalizability. 

Keywords: 

Colposcopy, Deep learning, Cervical Lesion Classification, High-grade Squamous Intraepithelial Lesion, Cancer prevention 

1. Introduction 

The World Health Organization (WHO) has identified the global elimi-nation of cervical cancer as a major public health priority. Regular screening is estimated to reduce cervical cancer mortality by up to 80% [1]. A central challenge in screening programs is the accurate classification of cervical in-traepithelial neoplasia (CIN), particularly the differentiation between CIN1 −

(normal or grade 1) and CIN2 + (grade 2 or higher), which informs treatment decisions. This classification task is inherently difficult and highly dependent on the skill and experience of the colposcopist. Reported diagnostic accuracy for differentiating CIN1 − from CIN2 + varies substantially, with values ranging from approximately 50%, which is only marginally above chance level, to about 70% [2, 3, 4]. These limitations are exacerbated in low- to middle-income countries (LMICs), where access to expert colposcopists and biopsy services is often restricted. Computer-aided 2(a) (b)    

> Figure 1: Previous approaches to DL-based cervical cancer screening have been developed and validated on private datasets from single countries despite high image variability. (a) Distribution of data from our study (di-amonds) and previous studies (circles). (b) 2D visualization of our test data, color-coded by site.

analysis offers a promising avenue to support both the training of gynecol-ogists and the screening process itself, particularly in resource-constrained environments. Despite this potential, prior studies have been limited in scope, relying on data from single countries or institutions, as illustrated in Fig. 1. In addition, existing deep learning (DL)-based approaches in this domain remain sparse, reflecting the difficulty of the task, as shown in Fig. 2(b). Li et al. [5] em-ployed a Deeplabv3+ model, evaluating it on data from a single hospital in China. Yu et al. [6] proposed CLSNet, which combines a region proposal net-work with EfficientNet-B3, also validated on data from one hospital in China. Cho et al. [7] investigated Inception-ResNet-v2 and ResNet-152, using data from three hospitals in Seoul, though without incorporating multi-country validation or out-of-distribution testing. Other studies, such as those by Yan et al. [8] and Sha et al. [9], relied on multimodal inputs, including saline or iodine images and patient metadata. These modalities are often impractical for real-time deployment due to acquisition constraints. Technically, all prior work formulated the problem as a single-task super-vised learning task, without exploring multi-task learning frameworks com-bined with the use of augmentation strategies during training or inference to address intra- and inter-patient variability. Although high variability across data sources is evident, as illustrated in Fig. 1(b), no existing study has con-3ducted validation across multiple countries. An additional limitation is the lack of stratified failure analysis using available metadata, which remains an underutilized resource. While metadata such as patient age or transformation zone type has occasionally been used as auxiliary input to DL models[10], it has rarely been leveraged to investigate performance breakdowns across subpopulations. For example, Li et al. [11] stratified diagnostic accuracy of human colposcopists by age group but did not incorporate metadata-driven failure analysis within a DL framework, nor did their study consider broader patient characteristics. We address these gaps in the literature with the following contributions: 

New method: We present a novel DL-based approach for cervical cancer screening that formulates the problem as a multi-task learning task, using segmentation masks and extensive data augmentation during both training and testing to address image variability. 

Large-scale validation: We perform large-scale validation using public and private datasets from four countries(see Fig. 1), demonstrating superior per-formance compared to human annotators and established baseline methods. 

Identification of failure cases: We conduct detailed failure analysis by stratifying model performance with respect to patient-specific variables, in-cluding age, comorbid pathologies, transformation zone type, and pathog-nomonic signs, as illustrated in Fig. 5. 4(a) (b) 

Figure 2: Lesion classification and segmentation in colposcopy is a highly difficult and under-explored task. (a) Automated detection of cervical lesions can serve as assistance for clinicians during cancer screenings. However, the clas-sification of cervical lesions into CIN1 − cases, which include normal and low-grade lesions, versus CIN2 + lesions, which include high-grade lesions and cancer, a task that is relevant to determine the need for therapy, is considered difficult even among experts [2, 3, 4]. (b) Despite the high clinical relevance, DL-based publications for colposcopy are underrepresented in the computer vision community. A structured literature search on PubMed and Google Scholar was conducted to identify relevant studies at the intersection of colposcopy, deep learning, and validation. The anal-ysis revealed that previous work on AI-based lesion classification and performance assessment was limited in scope and generalizability. 

2. Materials and Methods 

Section 2.1 introduces the datasets utilized for model development and evaluation. Section 2.2 presents the multi-task learning approach, includ-ing core concepts, implementation, and ensembling. Section 2.3 describes the experimental design used to evaluate performance, compare to previous methods, and analyze failures cases using metadata stratification. 

2.1. Data 

In the following, we provide details on data characteristics, our data split-ting strategy and curation process. 

2.1.1. Dataset Overview 

We utilized colposcopic image data from four countries to ensure di-verse representation in ethnicity, imaging conditions and device character-5Training/ Validation Test DS Germany Test DS India Test DS Cambodia Test DS Romania   

> DS_dev_ train DS_dev_ val DS_test_id DS_test_ood

N 696 174 177 197 165 100 

π 0.64 0.63 0.23 0.2 0.37         

> Table 1: Training and test data statistics. Training and validation consist of data sourced from a private German database, as well as the publicly available IARC Colposcopy Imagebank [14] from India. An in-distribution (ID) German dataset is reserved for testing (Test DS Germany). Furthermore, we acquired im-ages from Cambodia as an out-of-distribution(OOD) test set (Test DS Cambodia). Lastly, we use two additional OOD datasets for testing, namely publicly available IARC VIA Imagebank [15](Test DS India) from a separate Indian hospital and AnnoCerv from Romania [13] (Test DS Romania). Here, Ndenotes the number of samples and πthe prevalence of the positive class.

istics. Privately acquired datasets from Cambodia and Germany were com-plemented by two public datasets: the Indian Atlas of Colposcopy[12] from the WHO and the Romanian AnnoCerv dataset by Socolov et al. [13]. Eth-ical approval for this study was granted by the Ethics Committee of the Medical Faculty of Heidelberg (reference number pending). All data were anonymized, and informed consent was obtained where applicable, following the Declaration of Helsinki. The inclusion of data across multiple coun-tries introduces substantial variation in imaging quality, lighting, and sensor types, making cross-site generalization a critical research question. Detailed dataset statistics are provided in Table 1. 

2.1.2. Data Splitting 

To prevent data leakage and overfitting, we employed a strict data split-ting protocol that separates development and evaluation phases. The de-velopment dataset included training and validation subsets, while the test dataset remained untouched during model development. The development dataset was split into 80% training and 20% validation. The training sub-set (DS_dev_train) consisted of 696 images: 539 from the German dataset and 157 from the IARC Colposcopy Imagebank[14]. The validation subset (DS_dev_val) included 174 images: 135 from Germany and 39 from IARC, 6and was used for hyperparameter tuning and ablation studies. The test dataset comprised two components: in-distribution and out-of-distribution samples. The in-distribution test set (DS_test_id) contained 177 German images. The out-of-distribution test set (DS_test_ood) included 197 Indian cases from the IARC VIA ImageBank[15], 165 Cambodian cases, and 100 Romanian images from AnnoCerv[13], totaling 462 external samples. 

2.1.3. Dataset Curation 

Colposcopic screening is used to detect and grade cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN), which can be categorized as normal, CIN1, CIN2, CIN3, or invasive cancer[16]. For private datasets, one aceto-white image per patient was selected based on optimal cervix visibility. Histopathological biopsy results served as reference during training and evaluation. For multi-task training, expert-provided segmentation masks and binary class annotations were obtained to serve as human baselines. Annotation followed a two-stage protocol: initial lesion delineation and grading by two trained medical stu-dents, followed by expert review for label confirmation or correction. See Fig. 3 for full details. For IARC and AnnoCerv datasets, one acid-stain image per case was selected, with labels extracted from corresponding metadata. To enable stratified failure analysis, we curated metadata for DS_dev_train (Germany), including age, transformation zone type, comorbidities, and pres-ence of pathognomonic signs. Age was binned by decade, starting from <30 up to >60. Transformation zones were categorized as: Type 1 (fully visi-ble), Type 2 (partially receded), and Type 3 (mostly hidden), as shown in Fig. 5(a). Documented comorbidities included condylomata acuminata, ec-topy, atrophy, and polyps (see Fig. 5(b)). These conditions can obscure lesion boundaries or mimic pathological appearances. Condylomata, caused by low-risk HPV, and spontaneous changes like ectopy or atrophy introduce diagnostic complexity. Pathognomonic signs, indicative of high-grade lesions, were also recorded. Our study data contained cases exhibiting the following pathognomonic signs: Rag signs (epithelial peeling), inner border signs (dis-tinct, well-defined acetowhite line marking the inner margin of a cervical lesion), ridge signs (raised or thickened epithelial ridges), cuffed gland open-ings (glands surrounded by acetowhite epithelium), fine or coarse punctation (dot-like vascular patterns within the lesion) and fine or coarse mosaic (vas-cular pattern with tile-like appearance). Visualizations are shown in Fig. 5(c). 7Figure 3: Annotation protocol presented to clinicians for privately ac-quired data. Anonymized aceto-white colposcopy images were presented to med-ical students for localization of lesions and they were asked to grade lesion severity to the best of their knowledge. They were further asked to label transformation zone, comorbidity and pathognomonic sign presence. After these steps, the images were tagged as ready for review for the expert gynecologist. The expert confirmed or corrected the findings by approving or adjusting the annotations. 

2.2. Multi-task Learning Approach 

The clinical objective is to assess whether therapy is required by detecting cervical lesions and distinguishing high-grade from low-grade findings. Since only CIN2+ cases require treatment, we framed the task as binary classi-fication problem (see Fig. 2(a)): CIN1 − (normal and CIN1) versus CIN2 +

(CIN2, CIN3, and cancer). 

2.2.1. Concept 

To achieve this, our approach builds upon three core design components. First, we formulate cervical cancer screening as a multi-task learning problem. As shown in Fig. 2(a), lesion detection and classification are challenging tasks. To improve feature representation, we incorporate lesion segmentation masks and jointly train for lesion classification and segmentation. Second, given the high visual variability in colposcopy images, illustrated in Fig. 1(b), we apply extensive data augmentation during training and testing to enhance 8model robustness. Third, we adopt a model ensembling strategy, following the methodology outlined by Eisenmann et al. [17], to improve prediction stability and generalization. 

2.2.2. Implementation Details 

The proposed architecture is based on EfficientNet-B4 [18] with dual heads: a classification head that distinguishes CIN1 − from CIN2 + cases, and a segmentation head that learns the region of interest. During training, we applied standard augmentations including rotation, flipping, and translation, as well as complex transformations such as random-resized-crop, color trans-fer, and color jitter, followed by resizing to 320x320 px and normalization. For heavy augmentation, we employed FancyPCA to perturb color channels, Gaussian noise to simulate device specific acquisition variability, and ran-domized Cutout to obscure up to 15% of the image, each applied with 50% probability. Test-time augmentation involved randomly applying horizontal or vertical flips and center-cropping, and finally resizing and normalization. Each image underwent four augmented evaluations, and predictions were av-eraged. Model ensembling was performed using five-fold cross-validation on the development dataset (DS_dev_train + DS_dev_val). Each fold was trained using the design decision that achieved the best validation perfor-mance. Final predictions were computed by averaging class probabilities across all five models. 

2.3. Experimental Design 

Our experiments address four key questions, Q1–Q4, designed to evaluate model performance, compare to existing methods, assess design decisions, and understand failure modes. 9Figure 4: Pipeline overview. (Training) The problem of cervical cancer screening was phrased as a multi-task learning problem using histopathology results and hu-man lesion segmentation as reference data for training. An EfficientNet-B4 served as backbone for a classification head for CIN1 −/CIN2 + lesion classification. A seg-mentation head was employed to capture spatial information that improves feature representations in the latent space. To increase robustness, we made heavy use of augmentations during training (Heavy aug.). (Testing) To account for high image variability, test-time augmentation (Test-time aug.) was applied to an unseen im-age using rotation, scaling and center-crop. An ensemble of five trained models was used for inference. The outputs of the ensemble are averaged at the plus node for the final prediction. 

10 Q1: How does our method perform compared to human annota-tors? We evaluated model performance against human baseline annotations described in section 2.1.3, using histopathological diagnosis as reference. Fol-lowing Maier-Hein et al. [19], we report balanced accuracy (BA) to account for class imbalance. Sensitivity is emphasized due to its clinical relevance in identifying high-grade lesions. Specificity is also reported to assess the model’s ability to avoid false positives, which is critical in minimizing un-necessary interventions. To further capture diagnostic reliability, we report the F1-score for the positive class, which balances sensitivity and precision. Confidence intervals were estimated using 1,000 bootstrap resamples, as per-formance variability is critical for assessing clinical translation in biomedical imaging AI, following Christodoulou et al. [20]. 

Q2: How does our proposed method perform compared to pre-vious methods? We closely re-implemented two architectures from prior work for comparison: ResNet-152 (Cho et al. [7]) and DeepLabv3+ (Li et al. [5]), adapting their classification heads for binary classification. In accor-dance with the Metrics Reloaded framework, we report a target value-based metric Specificity@Sensitivity=0.9 (Spec@Sens=0.9), prioritizing sensitivity for high-grade lesion detection, even at the cost of increased false positives. Area under the ROC curve (AUC) is provided as a threshold-independent metric, commonly used in classification tasks to reflect the model’s ability to discriminate between classes across all decision thresholds. Finally, BA is included for comparability across datasets with different prevalence rates. 

Q3: What are the most important design decisions? To assess the impact of each component of our pipeline, we conducted ablation studies on the validation set (DS_dev_val) and evaluated their generalization on our four country-specific test sets (DS_test_id + DS_test_ood). Starting from a baseline EfficientNet-B4 pretrained on ImageNet [21], we sequentially introduced multi-task learning, heavy training augmentations, test-time aug-mentation, and ensembling. Performance gains were evaluated at each stage. 

Q4: What characterizes images on which our method fails? To identify systematic failure patterns, we stratified performance by the four metadata categories outlined in section 2.1.3: patient age, transformation zone type, comorbidities and presence of pathognomonic signs. A represen-tative visualization of selected patient markers is shown in Fig. 5. 11 (a) 

Atrophy Ectopy Condyloma Polyp       

> (b)
> Rag sign Inner border sign Ridge sign Cuffed crypt
> Fine punctation Coarse punctation Fine mosaic Coarse mosaic
> (c)

Figure 5: Patient marker visualization for failure analysis stratification. 

(a) Transformation zone: Region at the squamocolumnar junction where cervical lesions typically arise. Transformation zone is fully visible for T1 and increasingly recedes inwards the cervix canal, making it partially visible for T2 and mostly or entirely hidden for T3. (b) Other pathology: Illustrations of comorbidities featured in our study. (c) Pathognomonic signs: Visualization of disease-specific diagnostic indicators that were present in our study. 

12 (a) (b)     

> Figure 6: Our model outperforms human experts using histopathology data as ground truth. (a) Balanced Accuracy (BA), F1-score, sensitivity, and specificity are shown for human annotators compared to our proposed method for in-distribution test data (Test DS Germany). Error bars represent the 95% bootstrap-based confidence interval. Our method shows superiority compared to the human annotator in the BA, F1-score and sensitivity metric. (b) Example image and respective segmentation mask of a lesion misclassified by a human an-notator.

3. Results 

3.1. Q1: How does our method perform compared to human annotators? 

As shown in Fig. 6, our method outperforms human annotators in terms of overall diagnostic performance. It achieves a 6.3 percentage points ( pp) increase in balanced accuracy, as well as higher F1-score and sensitivity. No-tably, expert annotations show a low sensitivity score of 0.51 compared to our method which achieves a sensitivity of 0.71. Human annotators outper-form our method in specificity, but the specificity values remain high at 0.81 for human and 0.69 for method specificity, respectively. 

3.2. Q2: How does our method compare to previous methods? 

Across all country-specific test sets, all methods experienced performance degradation on out-of-distribution data. Our approach consistently outper-forms both baselines in terms of Spec@Sens=0.9. For Test DS Germany and Test DS India, our method achieves the highest AUC, outperforming the 13 Figure 7: Our method outperforms the baseline methods across different metrics. A Blob plot representing model ranking was created using hierarchical bootstrapping. First, the four country test sets were sampled with replacement. Next, AUC and Spec@Sens=0.9 were calculated for a bootstrapped version of that test set. The models are then ranked. Finally, this procedure is repeated 1000 times to receive a distribution of ranking scores. Blob size shows frequency of rank across the 1000 bootstrap samples. X marks the mean rank and whiskers represent the standard deviation. Plot is inspired by [22]. 

next-best model by 21.3 pp and 12.7 pp, respectively. While DeepLabv3+ achieves higher AUC and balanced accuracy on the Test DS Cambodia and Test DS Romania, it shows lower specificity than our method. Quantitative results are summarized in Table 2. Aggregated rankings across all countries confirm that our method demonstrates the best overall performance among all evaluated models, as shown in Fig. 7. 

3.3. Q3: What are the most important design decisions? 

Ablation studies on DS_dev_val highlight multi-task learning as the most impactful design choice, increasing Spec@Sens=0.9 by 59.9 pp and AUC by 8.3 pp. Combining multi-task learning, heavy augmentation, and test-time augmentation yielded the highest overall scores, boosting Spec@Sens=0.9 by 88.1 pp and AUC by 14.5 pp. When applied to the full test set, this trend persisted. Multi-task learning provided the largest single increase in Spec@Sens=0.9, improving it by 70.1 pp. The final ensemble model achieved a maximum Spec@Sens=0.9 of 0.41, representing a 241% increase over the 14 Test Set Model Spec@Sens=0.9 

(95% CI) 

AUC 

(95% CI) 

BA 

(95% CI) Test DS Germany Ours 0.28 (0.13–0.43) 0.74 (0.66–0.81) 0.70 (0.62–0.77) Cho et al. [7] 0.17 (0.06–0.31) 0.59 (0.49–0.67) 0.55 (0.50–0.60) Li et al. [5]) 0.08 (0.00–0.19) 0.61 (0.53–0.69) 0.51 (0.45–0.58) Test DS India Ours 0.38 (0.12–0.61) 0.80 (0.71–0.88) 0.70 (0.62–0.78) Cho et al. [7] 0.11 (0.04–0.23) 0.52 (0.42–0.62) 0.50 (0.49–0.50) Li et al. [5]) 0.36 (0.22–0.52) 0.71 (0.62–0.80) 0.64 (0.56–0.72) Test DS Cambodia Ours 0.28 (0.15–0.43) 0.60 (0.51–0.74) 0.52 (0.45–0.59) Cho et al. [7] 0.02 (0.00–0.07) 0.44 (0.32–0.56) 0.52 (0.49–0.57) Li et al. [5]) 0.27 (0.12–0.54) 0.68 (0.58–0.79) 0.62 (0.53–0.72) Test DS Romania Ours 0.20 (0.06–0.32) 0.54 (0.41–0.65) 0.51 (0.40–0.61) Cho et al. [7] 0.08 (0.00–0.33) 0.47 (0.35–0.60) 0.45 (0.37–0.55) Li et al. [5]) 0.18 (0.04–0.41) 0.59 (0.47–0.71) 0.54 (0.46–0.62) Table 2: Test set performance for various metrics across all test sets. We report Specificity@Sensitivity=0.90, AUC, and Balanced accuracy (BA) for our method and two baseline models, across all four test sets. Our method showcases the highest Spec@Sens=0.9 across all test sets. For Test DS Germany and Test DS India, our method achieves superior performance compared to the baseline. For Test DS Cambodia and Test DS Romania, the baseline method DeepLabV3 scores higher in AUC, but shows a low specificity at high sensitivity level (Speci-ficity@Sensitivity=0.9). 

15 Figure 8: Multi-task learning, heavy augmentations, and ensembling con-sistently improve performance on both validation and test sets. (Left) Specificity@Sensitivity=0.9: Including the multi-task approach showcased the biggest performance boost on both validation set and on all country test data. (Right) AUC: On our validation set, adding the multitask approach resulted in the highest increase in AUC, while adding augmentation gave the biggest boost in AUC score on all country test data. 

baseline. Heavy augmentation had the greatest effect on AUC, increasing it by 12.6 pp. The ensemble model reached the highest AUC of 0.76, a 20.6 pp improvement over the baseline (see Fig. 8). 

3.4. Q4: What characterizes images on which our method fails? 

Failure analysis was conducted by stratifying performance across four metadata categories described in section 2.1.3. Results are depicted in Fig. 9. 16 Age. Increasing age is often associated with a receding and less visible trans-formation zone[23], which complicates visual assessment during colposcopy. However, performance does not degrade consistently with age. AUC values ranged from 0.56 to 0.79, while Spec@Sens=0.9 scores ranged from 0.19 to 0.57. 

Transformation Zone Type. As the transformation zone becomes less visible from T1 to T3, classification becomes more challenging. However, perfor-mance remained variable without a clear trend. AUC scores ranged from 0.60 to 0.79, and Spec@Sens=0.9 values ranged from 0.14 to 0.43. 

Presence of Other Pathologies. In patients without comorbidities, the model achieved an AUC of 0.75. In contrast, cases with additional pathologies yielded an AUC of 0.40, indicating poor model performance. This represents an 87 pp AUC performance reduction and a 38.2 pp decrease in Spec@Sens=0.9. Due to the limited sample size of n=11, confidence intervals for this group are wide. 

Presence of Pathognomonic Signs. Pathognomonic signs are typically indica-tive of high-grade disease. Surprisingly, the presence of such signs reduced model performance. Cases without signs achieved an AUC of 0.75, while cases with signs dropped to 0.65, a 13.3 pp decrease. Spec@Sens=0.9 fell by 51.4 pp when signs were present. 17 Figure 9: The presence of other comorbidities had the biggest impact on performance. Spec@Sens=0.9 (Top) and AUC score (Bottom) stratified by different patient markers are reported, as well as their respective bootstrapped 95% CI which are represented as error bars. Among patient markers (Age, Trans-formation zone, Other Comorbidities and Pathognomonic signs), the presence of comorbidities have a clear impact on both metric scores, while the others show no consistent pattern. 

18 4. Discussion 

This study is the first to leverage data from multiple countries to develop and validate a DL algorithm for cervical lesion classification in colposcopy images. We present a novel DL method classifying cervical lesions into CIN1 −

and CIN2 + using only acid-stain colposcopy images routinely available in clinical exams. Validated on datasets from four countries, this approach enables low-cost, scalable deployment in live clinical settings, supporting healthcare providers in the Global South with immediate, point-of-care de-cision support for biopsy or treatment. Our method outperforms human experts in the challenging CIN1 −/CIN2 + classification task by achieving sig-nificantly higher sensitivity, the key metric for detecting all treatable lesions, even though humans demonstrate better specificity. With more data, perfor-mance could improve further, especially in difficult out-of-distribution sce-narios where generalization remains a challenge. A unique contribution of this work is the systematic investigation of fail-ure cases to guide future improvements. Stratification by age showed no clear performance trend, contrary to expectations given age-related changes such as less visible transformation zones or increased comorbidities. Similarly, no performance difference was observed across transformation zone types, sug-gesting visibility does not impact classification. However, comorbidities were associated with worse model performance, likely due to obstructed regions of interest and the limited sample size of such cases. Notably, the presence of pathognomonic signs did not enhance classifier performance, possibly due to their complexity and underrepresentation during training, which may confuse the model. Our study would benefit from additional annotated data to increase the sample size for all lesion classes, improving the reliability of conclusions drawn from failure case analyses. Nevertheless, compared to prior work, this study is unique in its diversity and scale, incorporating datasets with varied ethnic backgrounds, imaging qualities, sensor types, and lighting conditions. Unlike previous studies which often rely on multi-modal inputs such as saline or iodine images or additional meta-data, our method uses only acid-stain colposcopy images to facilitate live, accessible screening in low-resource settings. Prior methods’ code was not publicly available, requiring us to reimplement baselines. To address domain shifts between medical centers, we explored self-supervised pretraining with SimCLR to learn domain-invariant 19 features, focusing on semantic content rather than imaging artifacts. Initial results showed no performance gains. Similarly, leveraging general computer vision foundation models did not improve results, highlighting the challenges posed by the limited size of colposcopy datasets. Future research will expand training and test datasets across countries with varying image and class distributions. Increasing the representation of diverse comorbidities is crucial as these significantly impact model per-formance and clinical applicability. Improving model generalization remains a priority, with potential in domain generalization techniques such as fea-ture alignment, disentanglement, meta-learning, self-supervised learning, en-sembling, and distillation[24]. Explainable AI methods including saliency maps[25] and vision-language models[26] could enhance clinical trust and usability. Our study lays foundational work toward global AI-driven colposcopy, uniquely addressing lesion classification with multi-country data and aiming for translation to low- and middle-income countries. Future efforts should focus on generalization across diverse clinical settings, especially considering comorbidities, and promote cross-institutional data sharing to foster compa-rability and progress. 

5. Declarations 

Declaration of Funding 

This work was supported by the Dieter Schwarz Stiftung gGmbH. 

Declaration of generative AI and AI-assisted technologies 

During the preparation of this work the author used GPT-4 in order to improve grammar and help with rewording for conciseness. After using this tool, the author reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes full responsibility for the content of the published article. 

Data Availability Statement 

The private data sets used in this study are not publicly available at this time as we are engaged in ongoing curation and development in collaboration with external partners. The data may be made available upon completion of these processes and subject to agreement with all involved parties. Public data is available upon request from the respective sources[12, 13]. 20 References 

[1] World Health Organization, Cervical cancer screening, https: //www.who.int/data/gho/indicator-metadata-registry/ \imr-details/3240 , 2025. Accessed: 2025-07-15. [2] X. Chen, X. Pu, Z. Chen, L. Li, K.-N. Zhao, H. Liu, H. Zhu, Appli-cation of efficientnet-b0 and gru-based deep learning on classifying the colposcopy diagnosis of precancerous cervical lesions, Cancer medicine 12 (2023) 8690–8699. [3] A. Bai, J. Wang, Q. Li, S. Seery, P. Xue, Y. Jiang, Assessing colposcopic accuracy for high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesion detection: a ret-rospective, cohort study, BMC Women’s Health 22 (2022) 9. [4] B. Wei, B. Zhang, P. Xue, S. Seery, J. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Jiang, Y. Qiao, Improving colposcopic accuracy for cervical precancer detection: a ret-rospective multicenter study in china, BMC cancer 22 (2022) 388. [5] Z. Li, C.-M. Zeng, Y.-G. Dong, Y. Cao, L.-Y. Yu, H.-Y. Liu, X. Tian, R. Tian, C.-Y. Zhong, T.-T. Zhao, et al., A segmentation model to detect cevical lesions based on machine learning of colposcopic images, Heliyon 9 (2023). [6] H. Yu, Y. Fan, H. Ma, H. Zhang, C. Cao, X. Yu, J. Sun, Y. Cao, Y. Liu, Segmentation of the cervical lesion region in colposcopic images based on deep learning, Frontiers in Oncology 12 (2022) 952847. [7] B.-J. Cho, Y. J. Choi, M.-J. Lee, J. H. Kim, G.-H. Son, S.-H. Park, H.-B. Kim, Y.-J. Joo, H.-Y. Cho, M. S. Kyung, et al., Classification of cervical neoplasms on colposcopic photography using deep learning, Scientific reports 10 (2020) 13652. [8] L. Yan, S. Li, Y. Guo, P. Ren, H. Song, J. Yang, X. Shen, Multi-state colposcopy image fusion for cervical precancerous lesion diagnosis using bf-cnn, Biomedical Signal Processing and Control 68 (2021) 102700. [9] Y. Sha, Q. Zhang, X. Zhai, M. Hou, J. Lu, W. Meng, Y. Wang, K. Li, J. Ma, Cervifusionnet: A multi-modal, hybrid cnn-transformer-gru model for enhanced cervical lesion multi-classification, iScience 27 (2024). 21 [10] C. Yuan, Y. Yao, B. Cheng, Y. Cheng, Y. Li, Y. Li, X. Liu, X. Cheng, X. Xie, J. Wu, et al., The application of deep learning based diag-nostic system to cervical squamous intraepithelial lesions recognition in colposcopy images, Scientific reports 10 (2020) 11639. [11] X. Li, Y. Zhao, F. Xiang, X. Zhang, Z. Chen, M. Zhang, X. Kang, R. Wu, Evaluation of the diagnostic performance of colposcopy in the detection of cervical high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions among women with transformation zone type 3, BMC cancer 24 (2024) 381. [12] World Health Organization, Cervical-image-bank, https://screening. iarc.fr/cervicalimagebank.php , 2025. Accessed: 2025-07-15. [13] R. SOCOLOV, Annocerv: A new dataset for feature-driven and image-based automated colposcopy analysis, Acta Univ. Sapientiae Informatica 15 (2023) 306–329. [14] World Health Organization, Iarc-imagebank, https://prevention. datacollect.iarc.who.int/redcap/surveys/?s=7DKER78J7K , 2025. Accessed: 2025-07-15. [15] World Health Organization, Iarc-via, https://prevention. datacollect.iarc.who.int/redcap/surveys/?s=P4DX7FFLC3 , 2025. Accessed: 2025-07-15. [16] V. Mello, R. K. Sundstrom, Cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, in: Stat-Pearls [Internet], StatPearls Publishing, 2023. [17] M. Eisenmann, A. Reinke, V. Weru, M. D. Tizabi, F. Isensee, T. J. Adler, S. Ali, V. Andrearczyk, M. Aubreville, U. Baid, et al., Why is the winner the best?, in: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and Pattern recognition, 2023, pp. 19955–19966. [18] M. Tan, Q. Le, Efficientnet: Rethinking model scaling for convolu-tional neural networks, in: International conference on machine learn-ing, PMLR, 2019, pp. 6105–6114. [19] L. Maier-Hein, A. Reinke, P. Godau, M. D. Tizabi, F. Buettner, E. Christodoulou, B. Glocker, F. Isensee, J. Kleesiek, M. Kozubek, et al., Metrics reloaded: recommendations for image analysis validation, Na-ture methods 21 (2024) 195–212. 22 [20] E. Christodoulou, A. Reinke, R. Houhou, P. Kalinowski, S. Erkan, C. H. Sudre, N. Burgos, S. Boutaj, S. Loizillon, M. Solal, et al., Confidence intervals uncovered: Are we ready for real-world medical imaging ai?, in: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, Springer, 2024, pp. 124–132. [21] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, L. Fei-Fei, Imagenet: A large-scale hierarchical image database, in: 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2009, pp. 248–255. doi: 10. 1109/CVPR.2009.5206848 .[22] M. Wiesenfarth, A. Reinke, B. A. Landman, M. Eisenmann, L. A. Saiz, M. J. Cardoso, L. Maier-Hein, A. Kopp-Schneider, Methods and open-source toolkit for analyzing and visualizing challenge results, Scientific reports 11 (2021) 2369. [23] K. T. Desai, N. Hansen, A.-C. Rodriguez, B. Befano, D. Egemen, J. C. Gage, N. Wentzensen, C. Lopez, J. Jeronimo, S. de Sanjose, et al., Squamocolumnar junction visibility, age, and implications for cervical cancer screening programs, Preventive medicine 180 (2024) 107881. [24] J. S. Yoon, K. Oh, Y. Shin, M. A. Mazurowski, H.-I. Suk, Domain generalization for medical image analysis: A review, Proceedings of the IEEE (2024). [25] F. Dahan, J. H. Shah, R. Saleem, M. Hasnain, M. Afzal, T. M. Alfakih, A hybrid xai-driven deep learning framework for robust gi tract disease diagnosis, Scientific Reports 15 (2025) 21139. [26] E. J. Gong, C. S. Bang, Revolutionizing gastrointestinal endoscopy: the emerging role of large language models, Clinical endoscopy 57 (2024) 759–762. 23