Title: MICRON learns outcome-associated representations of spatial immune microenvironments

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 23

Markdown Content:
# MICRON learns outcome-associated representations of spatial immune microenvironments 

## Chi-Jane Chen 1* , Betsy George 1, Luvna Dhawka 4,Baggio Evangelista 5, Natalie Stanley 1,2,3* 

> 1

Department of Computer Science, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 

> 2

Computational Medicine Program, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 

> 3

Department of Genetics, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 

> 4

Curriculum in Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. 

> 5

Department of Neurology, The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. *Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): chijane@cs.unc.edu; natalies@cs.unc.edu; 

Abstract 

Spatial imaging proteomics modalities, such as imaging mass cytometry, enable comprehensive identification of immune microenvironments driving disease out-comes. Identifying outcome-associated immune microenvironments from these data has proven to be complex, as it requires segmenting cells with complex shapes and reconciling spatial signatures across many heterogeneous samples. We present MICRON , a segmentation-free, fully automated multiple-instance learning based tool for automatic identification of outcome-linked immune microenviron-ments. MICRON learns representations of samples profiled with spatial imaging proteomics modalities, enabling more accurate prognostic and diagnostic predic-tion over existing approaches. As a case study, we show that MICRON generates a comprehensive importance map that reveals key outcome-associated immune 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint microenvironments in brain cancer, uncovering coordinated cell-cell communica-tion between astrocytes, NK cells, and macrophages linked to survival outcomes. 

MICRON is provided as open source software for broad use by clinicians and biologists at https://github.com/ChenCookie/micron.  

> Keywords: imaging mass cytometry (IMC), spatial proteomics, segmentation-free, immune microenvironments, multiple-instance learning (MIL)

# 1 Introduction 

Spatial imaging proteomics technologies, such as imaging mass cytometry (IMC) and multiplexed ion beam imaging by time of flight (MIBI-TOF) can uncover the spatial tissue-immune microenvironments driving disease outcome or phenotypes [1– 5]. Prototypical spatial configurations between immune cells can be leveraged for better prognostic prediction, patient stratification, or treatment planning [3, 6, 7]. Currently, the majority of computational tools for detecting microenvironments require cell segmentation [8], posing challenges and limitations for cells with com-plex and non-spherical morphologies, such as, microglia [9]. We introduce MICRON 

(microenvironment-aware clinical representation learning for outcome prediction via multiple-instance learning) as a segmentation-free approach for sample featurization and microenvironment identification from multiplexed imaging proteomics modali-ties. Spatial signatures derived from MICRON prioritized outcome-associated immune microenvironments that can be leveraged for more accurate prognostic prediction and clinical immunophenotyping. Between spatially resolved proteomics and transcriptomic modalities, there have been numerous statistical and machine learning based approaches proposed to identify tissue immune microenvironments enriched in particular disease outcomes or phe-notypes [10–14]. The majority of these methods, such as, SpatialLDA [12], LEAPH [13], QUICHE [11], and graph-neural-network approaches [15] require segmentation of individual cells. While effective for canonical, spherically shaped immune cells, state-of-the-art segmentation approaches, such as Cellpose [16] and DeepCell [17], which have been trained on many manually annotated cells, may struggle with cells that do not have canonical spherical morphologies, such as, microglia and neurons [18]. CANVAS was recently [10] proposed as the first segmentation-free self-supervised approach for featurizing samples profiled with spatial multiplexed imaging modalities. For downstream identification of outcome-associated microenvironments, CANVAS requires clustering image regions across datasets based on their learned representa-tions, and can be sensitive to clustering hyperparameters. Furthermore, CANVAS does not make distinctions between informative and uninformative image regions in train-ing, limiting microenvironment interpretability and increasing noise in learned sample representations. We developed MICRON to improve the identification of outcome-associated immune microenvironments, while learning representations for each sample that can robustly predict clinical outcomes or phenotypes. MICRON is a segmentation-free, self-supervised 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

representation learning framework with several novel features. First, MICRON parti-tions the image into cohesive microenvironment regions, which form the building blocks of the learned representation required to compute a spatial immune signature for each sample (Fig. 1a). MICRON is trained to account for the variability in infor-mation content, such as microenvironment diversity, across image regions. Further, 

MICRON facilitates biological interpretation of outcome-associated microenvironments through an explainable SHAP framework [19]. The explainability component facilitates efficient identification of outcome-associated spatial immune microenvironments to generate mechanistic hypotheses about how cell-cell communication is tuned in disease or in response to a treatment. These innovative aspects of MICRON collectively facili-tate its use in identifying meaningful immune microenvironments from large clinical immunophenotyping studies. 

# 2 Results 

A key strength of MICRON is its ability to learn outcome-associated immune signatures, or composite per-sample representations, reflecting immune cell function and organi-zation in a tissue (Fig. 1b-d). Specifically, spatial immune signatures derived through 

MICRON led to more accurate prediction of binary clinical outcomes across three IMC datasets profiling patients with diabetes [20], breast cancer [6], and brain tumors [21] (datasets and binary outcomes to be described in Fig. 1e and summarized in Methods), in comparison to those obtained by CANVAS [10] and non-learning-based approaches (outlined in Supplementary Fig. S1). MICRON learned informative spatial immune sig-natures in the breast cancer dataset, enabling significantly higher classification of patients according to their survival outcome (Fig. 1f). Specifically, a model trained with MICRON predicted survival outcome in a held-out cohort of patients with (AUC = 0.63), which was significantly higher than the accuracy obtained with CANVAS (median pooling) as the second-highest performer (AUC = 0.56). MICRON similarly showed strong performance in classifying patients with metastatic brain cancer from glioblastoma (AUC = 0.88) in line with the accuracy obtained by CANVAS (mean pooling) (AUC = 0.88). However, MICRON also complements this strong classification accuracy by identifying outcome-associated microenvironments through co-occurrence patterns between cell-types from SHAP-prioritized image crops [19] (Fig. 1c-d). In the brain tumors dataset, we identified prominent spatial co-occurrences between astrocyte–natural killer (NK) cell, astrocyte–M1-like monocyte derived macrophages (MDM), and M1-like MDM–NK cells in patients with glioblastoma (Fig. 1g). Finally, 

MICRON and CANVAS (mean pooling) showed superior performance (both achieving AUC = 1.0) in classifying non-diabetic and type 1 diabetes patients, and was closely followed by the accuracy obtained using frequencies computed on the superpixel-level embedding vectors computed across the images (AUC = 0.97). Our results suggest that MICRON offers robust classification across diverse clinical datasets, without any segmentation, while also prioritizing outcome-associated cellular microenvironments. We hypothesize that MICRON achieves higher accuracy in the breast cancer dataset because it can better identify specialized, prognostic niches that may be obscured due to the disease heterogeneity. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

MICRON was trained to classify patients with brain metastasis (BrM) from glioblas-toma (GBM) patients, based on 127 multiplexed training images from the Karimi study [21]. In doing so, MICRON successfully prioritized brain microenvironments across 46 test set images, which were distinct between BrM and GBM patients. Fig. 2a shows representative images for a BrM patient and a GBM patient, colored by mark-ers used to distinguish cell-nuclei (DNA1), macrophages (CD68), astrocytes (GFAP), and NK cells (CD94/CD16). Zooming in on the top two highest scoring image regions (under MICRON ) for distinguishing BrM from GBM patients in a set of 46 held-out patients, we observed that astrocytes and NK cells tended to be more spatially prox-imal in GBM patients than in BrM patients (Fig. 2a-middle-right; additional details for cell phenotyping are shown in Fig. S3). Learned representations (embeddings) for the 20 top-most-informative superpixels (as defined in Methods) across test set images were clustered into k = 10 clusters, or prototypical microenvironment patterns across the 46 test set images (Fig. 2b-c). We classified each donor as having high abun-dance of a microenvironment (cluster) if its frequency of the microenvironment was in the top 25% across the 46 test set samples, which uncovered five statistically sig-nificant ( p ≤ 0.001) survival-associated microenvironments (Fig. S2). Patient survival given by the Karimi study was defined as the number of days survived post-surgery, and microenvironments 4 and 9 are shown as representative survival-associated and not associated with survival microenvironments, respectively (Fig. 2c). Kaplan-Meier survival analysis revealed longer survival times associated with a high abundance of cluster 4, mediated by a coordinated spatial signature between NK cells, astrocytes, and macrophages (Fig. 2d). The confidence of spatial signatures prioritized by MICRON can be further bolstered by considering ligand-receptor mediated signaling events that are enriched among transcriptomic measurements obtained in other glioblastoma studies. We evaluated the extent to which the survival-linked signature between NK cells, astrocytes, and macrophages, specifically, could be mechanistically supported across 240 glioblastoma patients profiling the brain with single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) from the Ruiz-Moreno study [22]. Using LIANA [23], a consensus tool for identifying enriched ligand-receptor interactions, significant interactions were predicted between NK cells and astrocytes (Fig. 2f), mediated between XCL1 (ligand in NK cells) and ADGVR1 (receptor in astrocytes). This suggests a plausible mechanism for communication between these cell-types mediated through their spatial proximity that is associated with longer survival times in patients with brain cancer (Fig. 2e-f). Spatial immune microenvironments uncovered with MICRON , complemented by enriched ligand-receptor signaling uncovered in transcriptomic studies provide rich signals that can be leveraged to generate robust immune signatures for diagnostic pre-diction. We computed scGPT embeddings [24] in the Ruiz-Moreno study [22] based on the set of genes relevant to ligand-receptor mediated cell-cell communication between astrocytes, NK cells, and macrophages that were observed to be enriched across these respective cells in the Karimi dataset. Immune signatures were computed by pooling scGPT embedding dimensions across astrocytes, NK cells, and macrophages in each sample and used to predict a binary age classification (age < 60 vs. ≥ 60) for each donor. The ability to predict age, or any clinical outcome, based on gene expression 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

signatures in astrocytes, NK cells, and macrophages suggests that their cell-cell com-munication is a tunable circuit across clinical phenotypes. Median pooling on scGPT embedding coordinates resulted in strong accuracy in age prediction (accuracy = 0.8), in contrast to the best result obtained selecting random cells and genes from each donor (accuracy = 0.62 under sum pooling) (Fig. 2g). This suggests that the genes relevant to ligand-receptor based signaling between astrocytes, NK cells, and macrophages pri-oritized by MICRON can be leveraged to engineer immune signatures for robust outcome prediction, or can form mechanistic hypotheses for future studies. 

# 3 Discussion 

MICRON leverages a scalable multiple-instance learning approach for learning outcome-associated spatial immune signatures from samples profiled with multiplexed imaging proteomics modalities. The segmentation-free nature of MICRON facilitates its applica-tion across tissues and disease contexts, particularly with respect to cells with complex morphologies, such as, neurons and microglia [9]. MICRON also provides an explainable framework for identifying and characterizing the most ubiquitous and information-rich outcome-associated immune microenvironments in an automated manner. MICRON 

can be used in clinical immunophenotyping studies to generate hypotheses about spatial immune microenvironments driving disease outcomes and phenotypes. As a key contribution, MICRON presents a segmentation-free, self-supervised representation learning framework that effectively captures informative regions within each sample. Removing the requirement for cell segmentation prevents potential biases introduced by segmentation models and variations in image quality. Furthermore, MICRON focuses on learning representations from multiplexed imaging data by selectively leveraging informative superpixels, or spatially contiguous regions, rather than processing the entire image or randomly sampled regions. This strategy thereby primes the model to learn image representations driven by dense cellular regions, in contrast to potentially less-informative background information [25]. 

MICRON complements existing automated approaches [11, 13, 15], in identify-ing outcome-associated tissue microenvironments without segmentation. Specifically, 

MICRON is the first approach to specify a map over the entire tissue image to prioritize spatial immune signatures driving an outcome. These spatial insights can be used to prioritize ligand-receptor mediated cell-cell communication mecha-nisms that may mediate the spatial proximity between cells [26–28]. Specifically, we applied the methodology to understand the brain immune microenvironments that differ between primary glioblastoma and metastatic brain tumors. These analyses highlighted co-occurrence between astrocyte–NK cell, astrocyte–M1-like MDM, and M1-like MDM–NK cells. Spatially, we have also discovered the co-occurrence between astrocyte, macrophage, and NK cell in the Ruiz-Moreno study, which is an indepen-dent single-cell transcriptomic study. This aligns with previous studies describing the role of reactive astrocytes in modulating NK cell-mediated immune surveillance [29] and their involvement in recruiting monocyte-derived macrophages to the brain TME [30, 31]. Featurizations learned through MICRON can also stratify patients by survival, enabling rapid identification of survival-linked immune microenvironments. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

This methodology can be expanded in future works by generating immune signa-tures for outcome prediction that can jointly take into account the spatial signatures gleaned through MICRON with other omics or clinical measurements [32–34]. Future work could adapt MICRON to learn continuous outcomes to enable mapping of how spatial signatures change across dynamic processes, such as cellular processes, disease progression, or age [35–37]. Overall, MICRON pioneers a new direction for inferring outcome-linked immune microenvironments from spatial multiplexed imaging proteomics data. MICRON facili-tates biological interpretability and usability for biologists and clinicians by prioritizing key image regions and immune microenvironments linked to disease outcomes or survival patterns without requiring any segmentation. Analysis with MICRON may prioritize cellular interactions that can be harnessed in immunotherapy approaches. 

# 4 Methods 

MICRON is a segmentation-free machine learning approach to learn outcome-associated immune signatures from spatial multiplexed imaging proteomics data in a scalable manner. In doing so, we identify information-rich sections of the image which we interpret to be key immune microenvironments associated with an outcome of interest. Our solution leverages a multiple-instance learning framework [38–40], where small crops or subsets of the training images are used to train a model to predict a clinical label. 

## 4.1 Datasets 

We evaluated MICRON using three publicly available imaging mass cytometry (IMC) datasets profiling clinical cohorts with diabetes (Damond et al. [20]), breast cancer (Jackson et al. [6]), and brain tumors (Karimi et al. [21]). We also complemented spatial insights uncovered through MICRON with mechanistic insights obtained from a complementary single-cell RNA-sequencing dataset profiling patients with glioblas-toma [22]. The details of these datasets are summarized below. 

Imaging Mass Cytometry (IMC) Datasets 

Diabetes dataset (Damond et al. [20]). The IMC dataset generated by Damond 

et al. longitudinally profiles pancreatic tissue samples obtained from 67 human donors, including both non-diabetic individuals and patients diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes (T1D). The dataset is comprised of 33 non-diabetic controls and 34 donors with established long-standing T1D. Long-standing T1D patients have a prolonged disease duration and show sustained autoimmune-mediated β-cell depletion and chronic inflammatory remodeling of the pancreatic microenvironments [41]. The IMC panel included 38 channels, where 35 of the channels measured protein markers. In our classification experiments, we aimed to distinguish non-diabetic donors from donors with long-standing T1D. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Brain tumors dataset (Karimi et al. [21]). The brain tumors IMC dataset [21] profiles the brain tumors microenvironment from 139 patients with primary glioblastoma (GBM) and 46 individuals with metastatic brain tumors (BrM). For each sample, we considered 18 common channels (17 protein markers) that were shared across samples. The samples were obtained across the brain tumors microenvi-ronments, including tumor core, invasive margin, and adjacent non-malignant tissue compartments. Because certain patients contributed multiple spatial regions, the dataset includes 270 GBM samples and 123 BrM samples. In classification experi-ments, we sought to classify patients with glioblastoma from those with metastatic brain tumors. 

Breast cancer dataset (Jackson et al. [6]). The breast cancer dataset [6] profiles primary breast tumor tissues with IMC. Associated with the IMC data were clinically annotated follow-up information, including patient age, tumor size, treatment history, and survival status. The IMC panel stained for 52 channels, where 40 of the channels measured protein markers. We note that there are multiple molecular subtypes of breast cancer, including positive or negative estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2). While there are likely subtype-specific effects on the tumor-immune microenvironments, here we are only focusing on learning representations of IMC images to classify patients according to their survival outcomes ( alive and deceased ). Survival is an endpoint that reflects patient prognosis and captures the combined effects of tumor biology and the surrounding immune microenvironments [42]. The full dataset is comprised of 376 tumor samples, including 274 patients who were alive at last follow-up and 102 patients who had died. 

Single-cell RNA-sequencing datasets 

GBMap Glioblastoma Dataset (Ruiz et al. ) [22]. The GBMap glioblastoma dataset [22] is comprised of single-cell measurements obtained from the brain tumors microenvironments from 240 patients, with associated clinical metadata, such as age, at diagnosis. We binned each patient’s age to define a binary outcome variable, clas-sifying patients as either young (< 60 years) or old (≥ 60 years) groups. Previous studies identified age-dependent changes in the tumor immune microenvironments with survival [43], which we sought to link to immune signatures generated through our approach. For downstream analysis, we retained only brain cell-types that were also present in the Karimi et al. brain tumors dataset. This resulted in 1,042,364 cells with 26,302 genes used in all subsequent analyses. 

## 4.2 Related methods used to featurize samples profiled with IMC 

We compared featurizations of the cellular tissue microenvironments generated through MICRON to several related methods for converting multiplexed imaging data into sample-representations or featurizations for downstream prediction tasks. Related methods are comprised of both segmentation-free and segmentation-based 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

approaches, as well as clustering-based frequency features and pooling-based features learned through MICRON . Schematic illustrations of these works are provided in (Fig. S1b). 

MICRON -derived features 

MICRON embedding frequency features MICRON embedding frequency features were created by first using MICRON to compute representations for superpixels obtained across images. Superpixels were clustered according to their learned embed-ding coordinates with k-means ( K = 30). For each sample, we computed frequency features as the fraction of superpixels assigned to each superpixel-based embedding cluster [44]. This K-dimensional frequency representation was used in downstream outcome-prediction tasks subsequently used as input to a downstream classifier to predict the outcome for each sample. 

Featurizations derived from existing segmentation and segmentation-free approaches 

Cellpose-based pooling featurization We developed a featurization based on Cellpose [16] segmentations of individual cells. To do so, we first selected three mark-ers to define the nuclear and cytoplasmic compartments to run the standard Cellpose algorithm (diabetes: H3, CD99, FOXP3; brain tumors: CD3, CD68, GFAP; breast cancer: H3, CD68, CD3). Cellpose identified individual cell boundaries and estimated cell centers. For F measured proteins in each dataset, we defined a F -dimensional featurization for each sample, reflecting the median expression of each of the F

proteins over all of the segmented cells. This featurization is akin to pseudobulk in standard single-cell analysis. 

Cellpose-based frequency featurization We used cell segmentations obtained through Cellpose to compute frequency-based featurizations for each sample. To do so, cells identified through Cellpose were clustered across all samples based on their 

F measured proteins through k-means ( K = 12). For each sample, we calculated the proportion of their cells across clusters to establish a frequency-based representation, summarizing cellular composition. 

CANVAS pooling-based featurization We used CANVAS [10], a self-supervised machine learning approach, to learn representations for local microenvironment (LTME) tiles in each IMC-profiled image. For each sample, we applied pooling oper-ations (mean, median, or max) across tile embeddings to obtain a featurization for each sample. 

Featurization for single-cell RNA sequencing data (scRNA-seq) 

scGPT pooling-based features. scGPT [24] is a transformer-based foundation model trained on large cellular atlases to learn contextualized representations for single-cell data profiled by single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), based on their 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

transcriptomic features. To compute sample featurizations from scGPT representa-tions, we used mean, median, and sum pooling to aggregate the 64 scGPT dimensions across all cells in each sample. 

## 4.3 Detailed methodology for MICRON 

Creating the most informative crop for training. For each image, we par-titioned pixels into perceptually coherent regions using SLIC [45]. SLIC produces compact, uniform superpixels that respect object boundaries while substantially reduc-ing the number of elements in the image to be processed. By default, we partitioned each image into 100 SLIC superpixels. For each superpixel, we defined a correspond-ing image crop as the bounding box enclosing the superpixel, with additional margins, and generated a binary mask. Shape irregularity of superpixels was quantified based on binary masks. We hypothesize that superpixels exhibiting greater deviation from a quadrilateral shape capture higher intra-region feature variation, are likely to contain more diverse cell-types, and are therefore more informative for downstream learning (Fig. S4). Based on this assumption, we selected the most M = 30 irregular super-pixels and used their corresponding crops and binary masks for model training. More details of the crop definitions are provided in Fig. S1a. The top 30 selected crops were ultimately used to generate a summarized, auto-mated annotation of the image. We repeated the same crop-generating process across all images. 

Multiple-instance learning with quantile-based aggregation. We used a fully convolutional network to generate spatially resolved predictions for each instance, followed by a quantile function that aggregates predictions across instances into a prediction for the entire sample (Fig. 1a). First, we defined a dataset D, comprised of a set of instances B (see Table S1 for notation details). For a sample i, the collection of their instances is denoted as Bi = {rmi }Mm=1 , where m specifies the m-th instance. The label (outcome) for the m-th instance of sample i is given as zmi , so that zmi = zi

for all m.Input images within a dataset, D all have dimensions of h × h × N . After being processed by a fully convolutional network (FCN), the instance-level class probabilities for instance m in sample i are encoded in P mi ∈ Rh′ 

> m×h′
> m×K

. Here, h′ 

> m

gives the number of pixels within instance m. These instance-level probabilities are subsequently aggregated by a quantile function P Quantile  

> i,k

, capturing the distribution of instance-level predictions for class k in sample i as, 

P Quantile  

> i,k

= Pr( zmi = k | B i). (1) From this, we featurize distributions of predicted probabilities in each class with a quantile operation as, 

Vi,k = Quantile( Pi,k ). (2) Computing this for each sample i, we obtain the quantiles of predicted probabilities for class k. In summary, quantile functions offer a discretized summary of the distribution of instance predictions to summarize each sample. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

Each spatial location in this tensor P mi,k corresponds to an instance defined by the receptive field of the network, such that instance-level prediction scores for class k

across the M instances can be defined as Pi,k = {P 1

> i,k

, . . . , P Mi,k }. After sorting the values in Pi,k and filtering those instances that are not in the binary mask generated by SLIC, we obtain a filtered vector per class ˜Pi,k . The values of ˜Pi,k are ultimately used to compute a quantile-based representation. Specifically, given a predefined number of quantiles, Q, the q-th quantile is selected as the element at index 



| ˜Pi,k | · q − 0.5

Q



, q = 1 , . . . , Q. (3) In this notation, · points to the index of the ordered values of ˜Pi,k , given as | ˜Pi,k |

satisfying a particular quartile threshold, q−0.5 

> Q

.Quantile vectors computed across all classes in sample i are concatenated into a joint vector Vi, where Vi = [ Vi, 1, . . . , V i,K ]. In our implementation, we consider only binary outcomes, such that each Vi = [ Vi, 1, V i, 2]. Furthermore, the class 1 quantile vector in sample i is given as Vi, 1 = Quantile( Pi, 1) = 

h

v(1)  

> i, 1

, . . . , v (Q)

> i, 1

i

, such that each quantile value is computed according to equation (3) as, 

v(q) 

> i, 1

= ˜P(⌈| ˜Pi, 1|· q−0.5 

> Q

⌉) 

> i, 1

, q = 1 , . . . , Q. (4) For each sample i, the concatenated quantile vector Vi is input to a softmax function, 

Si = softmax( Vi), to obtain the probability that the sample belongs to each class, Si

= {Si,k }Kk=1 . We then train the model using categorical cross-entropy loss over I total samples and K possible outcome labels as, 

LCE = − 1

I

> I

X

> i=1
> K

X

> k=1

yi,k log Si,k . (5) Here, yi,k is a binary indicator encoding whether the ground truth label of sample i

is outcome k. This loss function is used to optimize the learned representations for sample i by capturing concordance between true and predicted sample labels. 

Scoring and prioritizing outcome-associated microenvironments. For each test sample, MICRON outputs an embedding vector for every crop. These embeddings are extracted from the second-to-last layer of the network and capture high-level fea-ture representations. The d-dimensional embedding vector of the c-th crop in sample 

i is denoted as Xi,c ∈ R1×d (Fig. 1b). To stratify the contribution of each crop to the outcome prediction, we applied the SHAP TreeExplainer to a trained Random Forest classifier, using Xi,c as input [19]. For each crop c in sample i, SHAP assigns a con-tribution value to each of d embedding dimensions, where the SHAP value for each feature is denoted as, 

ϕ(i,c ) =



ϕ(i,c )1 , ϕ (i,c )2 , . . . , ϕ (i,c )

> d



. (6) 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

We then summarize the overall importance of crop c in sample i by computing the absolute sum of its SHAP values as, Importance i,c =

> d

X

> j=1

ϕ(i,c ) 

> j

. (7) This score reflects the overall contribution of each crop embedding computed to the final prediction by aggregating the contributions across all embedding dimensions. In all evaluation steps, we selected the top 20 highest-scoring crops in test images based on SHAP values and performed mean pooling over their embedding vectors to compute featurizations for each sample (Fig. 1b-c). This pooling step thereby creates sample featurizations, which reflect the most informative crops, while suppressing the less-relevant background information. We then conducted a second-stage evaluation in which the sample featurizations were used to train a random forest classifier to predict outcomes. This procedure was repeated over 200 random folds to improve robustness. For each fold, we recorded prediction probabilities for the test samples. The final AUROC and its standard deviation were obtained by averaging probabilities across all folds in the test set. 

# 5 Supplementary information 

Additional experimental results and details about MICRON and its evaluation are provided as Supplementary Information. 

# 6 Availability of Data and Software 

MICRON was evaluated on three publicly available datasets from Refs. [20] (Diabetes), [21] (brain tumors), and [6] (breast cancer). MICRON is available as open-source software at https://github.com/ChenCookie/micron. 

# 7 Acknowledgments 

This work was supported in part by grants R21AG084251 (to NS by the National Institute on Aging of the NIH), and R21AI171745 (to NS by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the NIH). 

# References 

[1] Chang, Q., Ornatsky, O.I., Siddiqui, I., Loboda, A., Baranov, V.I., Hedley, D.W.: Imaging mass cytometry. Cytometry part A 91 (2), 160–169 (2017) [2] Giesen, C., Wang, H.A., Schapiro, D., Zivanovic, N., Jacobs, A., Hattendorf, B., Sch¨ uffler, P.J., Grolimund, D., Buhmann, J.M., Brandt, S., et al. : Highly multi-plexed imaging of tumor tissues with subcellular resolution by mass cytometry. Nature methods 11 (4), 417–422 (2014) 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[3] Keren, L., Bosse, M., Marquez, D., Angoshtari, R., Jain, S., Varma, S., Yang, S.-R., Kurian, A., Van Valen, D., West, R., et al. : A structured tumor-immune microenvironment in triple negative breast cancer revealed by multiplexed ion beam imaging. Cell 174 (6), 1373–1387 (2018) [4] Keren, L., Bosse, M., Thompson, S., Risom, T., Vijayaragavan, K., McCaffrey, E., Marquez, D., Angoshtari, R., Greenwald, N.F., Fienberg, H., et al. : Mibi-tof: A multiplexed imaging platform relates cellular phenotypes and tissue structure. Science advances 5(10), 5851 (2019) [5] Janeiro, A.L., Wong, E.M., Jim´ enez-S´ anchez, D., Solorzano, C.O., Lozano, M.D., Teijeira, A., Schalper, K.A., Melero, I., De Andrea, C.E.: Spatially resolved tis-sue imaging to analyze the tumor immune microenvironment: beyond cell-type densities. Journal for Immunotherapy of Cancer 12 (5), 008589 (2024) [6] Jackson, H.W., Fischer, J.R., Zanotelli, V.R., Ali, H.R., Mechera, R., Soysal, S.D., Moch, H., Muenst, S., Varga, Z., Weber, W.P., et al. : The single-cell pathology landscape of breast cancer. Nature 578 (7796), 615–620 (2020) [7] Pelka, K., Hofree, M., Chen, J.H., Sarkizova, S., Pirl, J.D., Jorgji, V., Bejnood, A., Dionne, D., Ge, W.H., Xu, K.H., et al. : Spatially organized multicellular immune hubs in human colorectal cancer. Cell 184 (18), 4734–4752 (2021) [8] Greenwald, N.F., Miller, G., Moen, E., Kong, A., Kagel, A., Dougherty, T., Fullaway, C.C., McIntosh, B.J., Leow, K.X., Schwartz, M.S., et al. : Whole-cell segmentation of tissue images with human-level performance using large-scale data annotation and deep learning. Nature biotechnology 40 (4), 555–565 (2022) [9] Reddaway, J., Richardson, P.E., Bevan, R.J., Stoneman, J., Palombo, M.: Microglial morphometric analysis: so many options, so little consistency. Frontiers in neuroinformatics 17 , 1211188 (2023) [10] Tan, J., Le, H., Deng, J., Liu, Y., Hao, Y., Hollenberg, M., Liu, W., Wang, J.M., Xia, B., Ramaswami, S., et al. : Characterization of tumour heterogeneity through segmentation-free representation learning on multiplexed imaging data. Nature biomedical engineering 9(3), 405–419 (2025) [11] Ranek, J.S., Greenwald, N.F., Goldston, M., Camacho Fullaway, C., Sowers, C., Kong, A., Mouron, S., Quintela-Fandino, M., West, R.B., Bendall, S.C., et al.: The automated computational workflow quiche reveals structural definitions of antitumor responses in triple-negative breast cancer. Nature Cancer, 1–18 (2026) [12] Chen, Z., Soifer, I., Hilton, H., Keren, L., Jojic, V.: Modeling multiplexed images with spatial-lda reveals novel tissue microenvironments. Journal of Computa-tional Biology 27 (8), 1204–1218 (2020) 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[13] Furman, S.A., Stern, A.M., Uttam, S., Taylor, D.L., Pullara, F., Chennub-hotla, S.C.: In situ functional cell phenotyping reveals microdomain networks in colorectal cancer recurrence. Cell reports methods 1(5) (2021) [14] Hu, J., Li, X., Coleman, K., Schroeder, A., Ma, N., Irwin, D.J., Lee, E.B., Shinohara, R.T., Li, M.: Spagcn: Integrating gene expression, spatial location and histology to identify spatial domains and spatially variable genes by graph convolutional network. Nature methods 18 (11), 1342–1351 (2021) [15] Ali, M., Richter, S., Ert¨ urk, A., Fischer, D.S., Theis, F.J.: Graph neural net-works learn emergent tissue properties from spatial molecular profiles. Nature Communications 16 (1), 8419 (2025) [16] Stringer, C., Wang, T., Michaelos, M., Pachitariu, M.: Cellpose: a generalist algorithm for cellular segmentation. Nature methods 18 (1), 100–106 (2021) [17] Bannon, D., Moen, E., Schwartz, M., Borba, E., Kudo, T., Greenwald, N., Vijayakumar, V., Chang, B., Pao, E., Osterman, E., et al. : Deepcell kiosk: scaling deep learning–enabled cellular image analysis with kubernetes. Nature methods 

18 (1), 43–45 (2021) [18] Mrdjen, D., Cannon, B.J., Amouzgar, M., Kim, Y., Liu, C., Vijayaragavan, K., Camacho, C., Spence, A., McCaffrey, E.F., Bharadwaj, A., et al. : Spa-tial proteomics of alzheimer’s disease-specific human microglial states. Nature Immunology 26 (8), 1397–1410 (2025) [19] Lundberg, S.M., Lee, S.-I.: A unified approach to interpreting model predictions. Advances in neural information processing systems 30 (2017) [20] Damond, N., Engler, S., Zanotelli, V.R., Schapiro, D., Wasserfall, C.H., Kusmart-seva, I., Nick, H.S., Thorel, F., Herrera, P.L., Atkinson, M.A., et al. : A map of human type 1 diabetes progression by imaging mass cytometry. Cell metabolism 

29 (3), 755–768 (2019) [21] Karimi, E., Yu, M.W., Maritan, S.M., Perus, L.J., Rezanejad, M., Sorin, M., Dankner, M., Fallah, P., Dor´ e, S., Zuo, D., et al. : Single-cell spatial immune landscapes of primary and metastatic brain tumours. Nature 614 (7948), 555–563 (2023) [22] Ruiz-Moreno, C., Salas, S., Samuelsson, E., Brandner, S., Kranendonk, M., Nils-son, M., Stunnenberg, H.: Harmonized single-cell landscape, intercellular crosstalk and tumor architecture of glioblastoma. bioRxiv 505439 [Preprint](2022) [23] Dimitrov, D., Sch¨ afer, P.S.L., Farr, E., Rodriguez-Mier, P., Lobentanzer, S., Badia-i-Mompel, P., Dugourd, A., Tanevski, J., Ramirez Flores, R.O., Saez-Rodriguez, J.: Liana+ provides an all-in-one framework for cell–cell communica-tion inference. Nature cell biology 26 (9), 1613–1622 (2024) 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[24] Cui, H., Wang, C., Maan, H., Pang, K., Luo, F., Duan, N., Wang, B.: scgpt: toward building a foundation model for single-cell multi-omics using generative ai. Nature methods 21 (8), 1470–1480 (2024) [25] Liu, C.C., Greenwald, N.F., Kong, A., McCaffrey, E.F., Leow, K.X., Mrdjen, D., Cannon, B.J., Rumberger, J.L., Varra, S.R., Angelo, M.: Robust phenotyp-ing of highly multiplexed tissue imaging data using pixel-level clustering. Nature communications 14 (1), 4618 (2023) [26] Jin, S., Plikus, M.V., Nie, Q.: Cellchat for systematic analysis of cell–cell com-munication from single-cell transcriptomics. Nature protocols 20 (1), 180–219 (2025) [27] Troul´ e, K., Petryszak, R., Cakir, B., Cranley, J., Harasty, A., Prete, M., Tuong, Z.K., Teichmann, S.A., Garcia-Alonso, L., Vento-Tormo, R.: Cellphonedb v5: inferring cell–cell communication from single-cell multiomics data. Nature protocols 20 (12), 3412–3440 (2025) [28] Chen, M.-M., Gao, Q., Ning, H., Chen, K., Gao, Y., Yu, M., Liu, C.-Q., Zhou, W., Pan, J., Wei, L., et al. : Integrated single-cell and spatial transcriptomics uncover distinct cellular subtypes involved in neural invasion in pancreatic cancer. Cancer Cell 43 (9), 1656–1676 (2025) [29] Priego, N., Zhu, L., Monteiro, C., Mulders, M., Wasilewski, D., Bindeman, W., Doglio, L., Mart´ ınez-Saez, E., Cajal, S.R.y., Fustero-Torre, C., Pi˜ neiro-Y´ a˜ nez, E., Hern´ andez-La´ ın, A., Poli, V., Men´ endez, J.A., Soffietti, R., Bosch-Barrera, J., Valiente, M.: Stat3 labels a subpopulation of reactive astrocytes required for brain metastasis. Cancer Research 79 (13 S upplement ), 2746 − − 2746(2019) [30] Henrik Heiland, D., Ravi, V.M., Behringer, S.P., Frenking, J.H., Wurm, J., Joseph, K., Garrelfs, N.W., Str¨ ahle, J., Heynckes, S., Grauvogel, J., et al. :Tumor-associated reactive astrocytes aid the evolution of immunosuppressive environment in glioblastoma. Nature communications 10 (1), 2541 (2019) [31] Darmanis, S., Sloan, S.A., Croote, D., Mignardi, M., Chernikova, S., Samghababi, P., Zhang, Y., Neff, N., Kowarsky, M., Caneda, C., et al. : Single-cell rna-seq anal-ysis of infiltrating neoplastic cells at the migrating front of human glioblastoma. Cell reports 21 (5), 1399–1410 (2017) [32] Chen, C.-J., Yi, H., Stanley, N.: Conditional similarity triplets enable covariate-informed representations of single-cell data. BMC bioinformatics 26 (1), 45 (2025) [33] Acera-Mateos, M., Adiconis, X., Li, J.-K., Marchese, D., Carat` u, G., Hon, C.-C., Tiwari, P., Kojima, M., Vieth, B., Murphy, M.A., et al. : Systematic evaluation of single-cell multimodal data integration enhances cell type resolution and discovery of clinically relevant states in complex tissues. Genome Biology 27 (1), 64 (2026) 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[34] Chen, C.-J., Crawford, E., Stanley, N.: A graph coarsening algorithm for compressing representations of single-cell data with clinical or experimental attributes. In: Pacific Symposium on Biocomputing 2023: Kohala Coast, Hawaii, USA, 3–7 January 2023, pp. 85–96 (2022). World Scientific [35] Jagadeesh, K.A., Dey, K.K., Montoro, D.T., Mohan, R., Gazal, S., Engreitz, J.M., Xavier, R.J., Price, A.L., Regev, A.: Identifying disease-critical cell types and cellular processes by integrating single-cell rna-sequencing and human genetics. Nature genetics 54 (10), 1479–1492 (2022) [36] Zhu, H., Chen, J., Liu, K., Gao, L., Wu, H., Ma, L., Zhou, J., Liu, Z., Han, J.-D.J.: Human pbmc scrna-seq–based aging clocks reveal ribosome to inflammation balance as a single-cell aging hallmark and super longevity. Science advances 

9(26), 7599 (2023) [37] Stanley, N., Dhawka, L., Jaikumar, S., Huang, Y.-C., Zannas, A.S.: Microglia single-cell rna-seq enables robust and applicable markers of biological aging. Aging Cell 24 (8), 70095 (2025) [38] Kraus, O.Z., Ba, J.L., Frey, B.J.: Classifying and segmenting microscopy images with deep multiple instance learning. Bioinformatics 32 (12), 52–59 (2016) [39] Sun, M., Han, T.X., Liu, M.-C., Khodayari-Rostamabad, A.: Multiple instance learning convolutional neural networks for object recognition. In: 2016 23rd International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), pp. 3270–3275 (2016). IEEE [40] Couture, H.D., Marron, J.S., Perou, C.M., Troester, M.A., Niethammer, M.: Mul-tiple instance learning for heterogeneous images: Training a cnn for histopathol-ogy. In: International Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention, pp. 254–262 (2018). Springer [41] Atkinson, M.A., Eisenbarth, G.S., Michels, A.W.: Type 1 diabetes. The lancet 

383 (9911), 69–82 (2014) [42] Fridman, W.H., Pag` es, F., Saut` es-Fridman, C., Galon, J.: The immune contexture in human tumours: impact on clinical outcome. Nature Reviews Cancer 12 (4), 298–306 (2012) [43] Stoll, E.A., Horner, P.J., Rostomily, R.C.: The impact of age on oncogenic poten-tial: tumor-initiating cells and the brain microenvironment. Aging Cell 12 (5), 733–741 (2013) [44] Stanley, N., Stelzer, I.A., Tsai, A.S., Fallahzadeh, R., Ganio, E., Becker, M., Phongpreecha, T., Nassar, H., Ghaemi, S., Maric, I., et al. : Vopo leverages cellular heterogeneity for predictive modeling of single-cell data. Nature communications 

11 (1), 3738 (2020) 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint

[45] Achanta, R., Shaji, A., Smith, K., Lucchi, A., Fua, P., S¨ usstrunk, S.: Slic super-pixels compared to state-of-the-art superpixel methods. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 34 (11), 2274–2282 (2012) 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 1 MICRON learns outcome-associated spatial immune signatures and microenviron-ments. (a) Schematic of the multiple-instance learning framework used to train MICRON to predict outcomes from spatial imaging proteomics modalities. During training, square regions (instances) are cropped from the input image and processed by a fully convolutional network (FCN) to generate instance-level class predictions. The distribution of instance-level outcome probability predictions are summarized via a quantile-based featurization per each outcome class. The quantile vectors across classes are concatenated and input to a softmax function to predict an outcome probability for each sample. The model parameters, including both the FCN and quantile aggregation module, are opti-mized via the cross-entropy loss. ( b) Sample representations are computed for new, unseen samples by using the trained MICRON model to generate embedding vectors for each image crop. ( c) Crops across testing images are prioritized via SHAP values and identify both high-impact and outcome-associated image crops, corresponding to key immune microenvironments. ( d) For predicting sample outcomes, MICRON can specify two types of immune features, including (i) (multiple-instance (MI) fea-tures), obtained by pooling learned instance embedding dimensions across all cells and (ii) (frequency features), obtained by clustering instance embedding vectors and counting the proportion of instances assigned to each cluster per sample. Featurizations are used for downstream prediction tasks, such as, survival analysis. ( e) Immune signatures obtained through MICRON were evaluated for their accu-racy in predicting binary clinical outcomes on three publicly available clinical IMC datasets. The number of channels measured in the IMC experiments are denoted as well as the number of donors in each outcome class. ( f) The prediction accuracy of MICRON is compared to related methods for pre-dicting a binary clinical outcome across the three datasets (area under the ROC curve (AUROC)). (g) In the Karimi dataset, MICRON identified more frequent co-occurrences between astrocytes, NK cells, and M1-like MDMs in glioblastoma patients than was observed in patients with metastasized brain tumors. Bold green lines indicate the most frequently co-occurring cell-type pairs across top-most-informative image crops. Nodes circled in gold represent the set of cell-types that were most ubiquitously identified across immune microenvironments. 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint Fig. 2 Microenvironments uncovered with MICRON prioritized differential cell-cell com-munication mechanisms. (a) Representative brain metastasis (BrM) and glioblastoma (GBM) sample images colored according to expression of key markers for phenotyping macrophages (CD68), astrocytes (GFAP), and NK cells (CD94 and CD16). Superpixel importance scores show image regions prioritized by MICRON . Cells in high-scoring regions were segmented and phenotyped to reveal promi-nent microenvironments in the BrM and GBM classes. ( b) Overview of how MICRON can be applied to perform survival analysis in patients from the Karimi study. For a set of held out patients, MICRON 

was used to identify the top 20 most outcome-associated superpixels in each image (denoted as V in superpixel map). ( c) Image crops were clustered with k-means ( K = 10) using MICRON -computed embeddings. The UMAP (top) shows cells colored according to the embedding clusters. Patients were stratified into high and low frequency groups for each cluster. The UMAP (bottom) colors cells based on the risk of death and identifies clusters 4 and 9 as being survival-associated and survival unassociated, respectively. ( d) Cluster 4 was observed to be strongly associated with survival and highlights strong spatial co-occurrence between astrocytes, NK cells, and M1-like MDMs in glioblas-toma. ( e) Cell-cell communication patterns via ligand/receptor signaling were investigated in an independent cohort of glioblastoma patients profiled with single-cell RNA-seq (Ruiz-Moreno study [22]). Dotplots visualize top genes with enrichment patterns according to specificity rank (indicated by dot size and color) specifically between astrocytes, macrophages, and NK cells. ( f)A graph was constructed between cells where the edges are weighted by the specificity rank between a pair of cell-types. The graph reveals prominent cross-talk between astrocytes and NK cells, supporting the spatial signature prioritized by MICRON in the Karimi study. ( g) scGPT was used to featurize samples in the Ruiz-Moreno glioblastoma study based on genes prioritized by LIANA for mediating ligand-receptor mediated signaling between astrocytes, NK cells, and macrophages. Featurizations were used to predict the age of each donor under different pooling strategies (mean, sum, and median) in the implementation of scGPT. Prediction accuracy from scGPT features (pink) was compared to that obtained using featurizations obtained using random cells and genes (pink). 

.CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted April 16, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.04.14.718488 doi: bioRxiv preprint Supplementary Material for MICRON learns outcome-associated representations of spatial immune microenvironments 

1. MICRON AND RELATED FEATURIZATION APPROACHES FOR IMC ANALYSIS 

Fig. S1. Overview of MICRON and comparison to Cellpose-based and CANVAS-based featur-ization approaches. (a) Illustration of how image regions are defined in MICRON . Multiplexed imaging samples consist of multiple channels. Each sample is cropped into several square regions, where each crop contains multiple instances. A bounding box binary mask is gener-ated by SLIC and applied to define the region of interest within each crop. ( b) Comparison of 

MICRON with tile-based and segmentation-based approaches. In MICRON , each crop-level embed-ding vector is generated by a trained model. These embeddings are aggregated either by pool-ing to produce a sample-level representation or by clustering to compute embedding frequency features. In the CANVAS framework, local microenvironment (LTME) tiles are extracted and encoded using a trained encoder. Sample-level representations are obtained via global pooling operations (mean, median, or max) across tile embeddings. To define features via CellPose seg-mentations, the expression of each protein can either be pooled over all segmented cells or cells can be clustered to define frequency features. 

2. ADDITIONAL BIOLOGICAL INSIGHTS GLEANED ACROSS DATASETS Fig. S2. Identifying survival-associated microenvironments. To evaluate the prognostic relevance of the learned superpixel representations under MICRON , we clustered superpixels across samples using k-means ( K = 10) and computed the frequency of each cluster per pa-tient. For a given cluster, patients were stratified into high- and low-frequency groups based on the 75th percentile frequency of that particular cluster. The UMAP visualizations provide two-dimensional projections of superpixels identified across images. Blue points denote cells belonging to the indicated cluster. Kaplan–Meier survival analysis was used to quantify the differences in survival between patients with high and low frequencies of a given cluster. Sev-eral clusters showed significant survival differences between high and low frequency groups. Cluster 4 showed the most significant association with survival ( p < 10 −4). Fig. S3. Visualization of high-importance superpixel regions and associated cell-type mark-ers in the Karimi brain tumors dataset. Representative superpixel regions with high impor-tance scores identified by MICRON are shown for brain metastasis (BrM) and glioblastoma (GBM) samples (heatmaps on right). Images show expression for individual channels, in-cluding DNA1, CD68, GFAP, CD94, and CD16. DNA1 used to identify nuclei and determine cellular localization. Canonical markers were used to define key cell types, including CD 68 +

macrophages, GFAP + astrocytes, and CD 94 +CD 16 + NK cells. Blue and green squares denote two different superpixels selected and deemed to be outcome-associated. Corresponding cell-type annotations illustrate the spatial distribution of annotated cell populations. Zoomed-in views reveal spatial proximity among astrocytes, macrophages, and NK cells within the se-lected regions. Although CD94 expression was relatively low in BrM samples, CD 94 + signals were occasionally present but visually subtle in the corresponding images. Fig. S4. Visualization of high-importance superpixel regions and associated immune cell markers in the Damond et al. diabetes dataset. Examples of superpixel regions with high importance scores predicted by MICRON are shown for non-diabetic and long-duration diabetic samples. Images show expression for individual markers, including H3, CD68, MPO, CD45, and CD4. H3 staining was used to identify cell nuclei. Immune cell populations were anno-tated based on canonical markers, including CD 68 + macrophages, MPO + neutrophils, CD 45 +

leukocytes, and CD 4+ T helper cells. Light-green and light-blue boxes mark two representative superpixels with high model importance that were prioritized as being outcome-associated by the MICRON framework. The cell-type annotation maps display the spatial distribution of im-mune cells in these regions. The samples were not arcsinh-transformed during preprocessing, which causes the cropped regions to appear more irregular in shape. Enlarged views highlight the presence and local organization of immune cell populations within the influential super-pixel areas identified by MICRON .Table S1. Notation used in MICRON .

Symbol Description 

D The dataset containing all samples. 

i Index of a sample, where i = 1, . . . , I.

I Total number of samples in the dataset. 

Bi Bag (collection) of instances for sample i.

rmi The m-th instance in sample i.

m Index of an instance within sample i, where m = 1, . . . , M.

M Total number of instances in sample i.

zi Class label for sample i.

zmi Class label associated with the m-th instance in sample i, where zmi = zi for all m. 

h × h × N Dimensions of an input image, where h × h denotes spatial size and N is the number of channels. 

Pmi ∈ Rh′   

> m×h′
> m×K

Instance-level class probability tensor produced by the fully convolutional network for instance m in sample i.

h′ 

> m

Spatial dimension of the class prediction tensor for instance m.

K Total number of outcome classes. In this study, we consider binary classifica-tion (K = 2). 

Pi,k Collection of predictions for class k across all instances in sample i, defined as Pi,k = {P1

> i,k

, . . . , PMi,k }.

Pmi,k Prediction score for class k at instance m in sample i.˜Pi,k Filtered and sorted vector of foreground prediction scores for class k in sample i.

| ˜Pi,k | Cardinality in the filtered prediction vector ˜ Pi,k.

Q Number of quantiles used to summarize the distribution of instance-level predictions. 

q Quantile index, where q = 1, . . . , Q.

Vi,k Quantile vector for class k in sample i, which obtained from ˜ Pi,k.

v(q) 

> i,k

The q-th quantile value in the quantile vector Vi,k.

Vi Joint quantile feature vector for sample i, formed by concatenating quantile vectors from all classes and denoted as Vi = [ Vi,1 , . . . , Vi,K ].

Si Sample-level predicted class probability vector after applying softmax to Vi.

Si,k Predicted probability that sample i belongs to class k.

yi,k Binary indicator encoding whether sample i belongs to class k.

LCE Categorical cross-entropy loss over all samples. 

d Dimension of the embedding vector for each crop. 

Xi,c ∈ R1×d d-dimensional embedding vector extracted from the c-th crop in sample i.

ϕ(i,c) SHAP value vector for the embedding of crop c in sample i.

ϕ(i,c) 

> j

SHAP value of the j-th embedding dimension for crop c in sample i.

j Index of an embedding dimension, where j = 1, . . . , d.Importance i,c Importance score of crop c in sample i, computed as the sum of absolute SHAP values across all embedding dimensions.